My dear countrymen, Namaskar. I begin Mann Ki Baat’ today with a heavy heart. days ago, Mother India had to bear the loss of many of her valiant sons. These brave hearts made the supreme sacrifice in securing the lives of a hundred twenty five crore Indians. In order to ensure that their fellow countrymen could sleep peacefully, these brave sons toiled relentlessly, day or night. As a consequence of the Pulwama terror attack and the sacrifice of the brave jawans, people across the country are agonized and enraged. All around, there is a deluge of strong feelings of sympathy for the martyrs their family members. The outrage that singes your being and mine on account of the terrorizing violence replicates itself in the collective inner psyche’ of every citizen of the country; it also echoes in pro-humanity communities of the world, which sincerely believe in humanity. I respectfully bow to all the brave sons of the country, who laid down their lives, protecting the honour of their motherland, India. This martyrdom will keep inspiring us relentlessly to uproot the very base of terrorism; it will fortify our resolve. We shall have to take up this challenge facing our country, forgetting all barriers of casteism, communalism, regionalism and other difference, so that, our steps against terror are firmer, stronger and more decisive. Our armed forces have consistently displayed unparalleled courage and valour. On the one hand, they have displayed exemplary capabilities in restoring peace; on the other, they have retaliated in equal measure, in a language the attackers understand. You must have seen how within a hundred hours of the attack, retributive action was accomplished. The Army has resolved to wipe out terrorists and their harbourers. The martyrdom of these brave soldiers brought to the fore, through the media, touching, inspiring stories of their kin, which give hope and strength to the entire country. The fortitude displayed by Ram Niranjan ji, father of Martyr Ratan Thakur of Bhagalpur, Bihar, in this moment of tribulation is truly inspiring. He has expressed the wish of sending his second son too, to take on the enemy; if need be, he himself would go and fight. The country salutes the indomitable courage of Meena ji, wife of Martyr Prasanna Sahu of Jagatsinghpur, Odisha. She has vowed to send her only son to join the CRPF. When the mortal remains of Martyr Vijay Soren, draped in the tricolor reached Gumla, Jharkhand, his innocent son iterated that he too would join the armed forces. The mettle of this innocent lad is a representative sample of the feelings of each every child of the Nation today. Similar sentiments are coming to the fore in the households of our brave heart martyrs. No martyr, no family is an exception to that. Whether it be the family of Martyr Vijay Maurya of Devariya, the parents of Martyr Tilakraj of Kangra or the six year old son of Martyr Hemraj of Kota the story of every family of martyrs is full of inspiration. I urge the young generation to know and understand the fortitude and the sentiment displayed by these families. To understand the virtues of patriotism, sacrifice and perseverance, one doesn’t need to revert to historical events. These are but living examples before your eyes these very examples are a source of inspiration for the future of a rising glowing India. My dear countrymen, the rather long wait after Independence for a War Memorial is about to be over. It is natural for our countrymen to be curious about it. On the Narendra Modi App, Shri Onkar Shetty ji of Udupi, Karnataka has expressed his happiness on the completion of the National War Memorial. India not having a National War Memorial used to surprise me, pain me a Memorial that would house the valour saga series of our brave soldiers who laid down their lives, safe guarding their nation’s security. And I took a resolve that the country must have such a Memorial. We decided to erect the National War Memorial and I am contented to see it attaining completion in so little a time. Tomorrow, that is on the th of February, crores of we Indians will dedicate this National Soldiers’ Memorial to our Armed Forces. On part of the nation, this will be a small step towards repaying a great debt. This new memorial has been instituted in the heart of Delhi, in close vicinity of India Gate and Amar Jawan Jyoti. I do believe that for our countrymen a visit to the National War Memorial will be akin to a pilgrimage to a holy place. The National Soldiers’ Memorial is a symbol of the nation’s gratitude to those men who made the supreme sacrifice after we gained Independence. The Memorial’s design symbolises the indomitable courage of our immortal soldiers. The concept of the National Soldiers’ Memorial is based on the notion of four concentric circles, which depicts the journey of a soldier from coming into being, culminating in his martyrdom. The flame of the Amar Chakra symbolizes the immortality of the martyred soldier. The second circle, Veerta Chakra, depicts the courage and bravery of our soldiers. It is a gallery whose walls are inscribed with soldiers’ tales of valour. This is followed by the Tyag Chakra. This circle stands for the sacrifice of our soldiers. This bears the names of soldiers who made the supreme sacrifice, in letters of gold. Following that is the Rakshak Chakra which depicts the spirit of security. This circle houses a row of dense trees. These trees represent soldiers and send a reassuring message to the country’s citizens that our soldiers vigilantly guard borders round the clock and that they, the citizens are safe. If you take a holistic view, the National Soldiers’ Memorial is sure to turn out to be a sacred site, where people will throng, to get information on our great martyrs, to express their gratitude, to conduct further research on them. This place stands testimony to a series of sacrifices of men who laid down their lives for the sake of their country, so that we could live, so that the country could be safe secure, paving the way for development. One falls short of words in assessing the enormous contribution of our Armed Forces, Police and Para Military Forces in the strides of progress achieved by the country. In the month of October last year, I was blessed with the opportunity to dedicate the National Police Memorial to the nation. That too echoed the same sentiment, and we believe that we should be ever grateful to those policemen police women, who relentlessly ensure our safety security. I do hope that you will pay a visit to the National Soldiers’ Memorial and the National Police Memorial. Whenever you are there, do capture images and share them on social media so that others get inspired to come visit this sacred site with eagerness. My dear countrymen, for Mann Ki Baat’, I keep getting thousands of letters and comments from your side, on various platforms. Once while I was going through your comments, I came across an interesting point by Atish Mukhopadhyay ji. He has written that on the rd of March, , the British arrested Birsa Munda, when he was just years old. Coincidentally, the rd of March is also the birth anniversary of Jamsetji Tata. He further states that despite both personalities hailing from diverse family backgrounds, they enriched the legacy and the history of Jharkhand. Paying tributes to Birsa Munda and Jamsetji Tata is, in a way, salutation to the glorious legacy and history of Jharkhand. These two distinguished personalities brought glory honour not just to Jharkhand, but the entire country. The country is indeed grateful for their contribution. Today, if an inspiring personality is required for ably guiding our youth, it certainly is that of Bhagwan Birsa Munda. The British tree treacherously arrested him when he was asleep, in a covert manner. Do you know why they had to resort to such a cowardly operation Because even the British who raised a mighty empire used to be terrified of him. Bhagwan Birsa Munda took on the might of the guns cannons of the British, using traditional bows and arrows, to shake them apart. The fact is, when people are blessed with exemplary leadership, the might of arms pales in comparison to the collective will power of the people. Bhagwan Birsa Munda not only waged a struggle against the British for political freedom; he also actively fought for the social economic rights of the tribal folk. And he accomplished all this in his rather short life. He let sunshine peep into the darkened lives of the deprived and the oppressed. Bhagwan Birsa Munda sacrificed his life at the tender age of twenty five. Illustrious sons of Mother India, such as Birsa Munda have come into being in each every part of the country. There must’ve been hardly any part of India, which did not produce someone who contributed in the long freedom struggle, that spanned centuries. But it’s a misfortune that these tales of valour and sacrifice did not reach the new generations. If the valourous Bhagwan Birsa Munda made us aware of our existence identity, far-sighted Jamsetji Tata created great institutions for the country. Jamsetji Tata was a true visionary, who not only foresaw India’s future, but also duly laid strong foundations. He knew very well that making India a hub of science, technology and industry was imperative for her future. It was his vision that culminated in the establishment of the Tata Institute of Science, which we know as Indian Institute of Science today. Not just that, he also established world renowned institutions and industries such as Tata Steel. On a voyage to America, Jamsetji Tata met Swami Vivekananda on the ship, and an important topic of their discussion was the outreach spread of Science Technology in India. It is said this very discussion led to the founding of the Indian Institute of Science. My dear countrymen, our former Prime Minister Morarji Desai was born on the th of February. All of you know that this day comes just once in four years. A simple, peace loving personality, Morarji bhai was one of the most disciplined leaders. In Independent India, the record of presenting the budget the maximum number of times is held by Morarji bhai Desai. Morarji Desai steered the course of the country through some difficult times, when the very democratic fabric of the country was under a threat. To save democracy, Morarji Desai flung himself in the movement against imposition of Emergency. For this, he had to pay a heavy price in his old age. The government of that time arrested and incarcerated him. But when the Janata Party won the general elections in , he became the Prime Minister of the country. During his tenure, the th constitutional amendment was introduced. This was important because the nd amendment which was brought during the emergency, curtailed the powers of the Supreme Court and implemented provisions which stood to violate our democratic values, was struck down. The th amendment, made it mandatory that the proceedings of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies were made public through the newspapers. This amendment, restored certain powers of Supreme Court and declared that the fundamental rights granted under Article and of the Constitution could not be abrogated during the Emergency. For the first time constitutional safeguards guaranteed that the President could only announce the emergency upon the written recommendation of the Cabinet, and that the period of emergency could not be extended more than six months at any stretch of time. In this way, Morarji Bhai ensured that the way democracy was assassinated in by imposition of emergency, could never be repeated again in the future. The upcoming generations of our nation will always remember his priceless contribution in maintaining the sanctity of Indian democracy. Once again I pay my homage to a great leader like him. My beloved countrymen, this year too, there was a great buzz about the Padma award. Today as we head towards a new India, in which we want to honour those who are doing their work at the grass-root level without any care for a reward. They, by their diligence, are powering positive changes in the lives of others in myriad ways. In reality they are true Karmyogis,’ who are selflessly engaged in public service, social service and, above all, in the service to the nation. You must have been a witness yourself to the curiosity in the air when the Padma awards are announced, and people are inquisitive about the awardees. In a way, I consider this to be a huge pat on the back because these are people who are not on the front page of a Magazine or Newspaper or on our TV screens. They are far removed from the world of glitter and glare, and are people who do not care about name or fame but simply believe in toiling at the proletarian level. They believe in living in the manner as preached by the shloka of Srimadbhagvad Gita 'Yoga: Karmasu Kaushalam', or excellence in action is yoga. I would like to tell you about some of these people. You must have heard about Odisha's Daitari Nayak, who is not nicknamed the 'Canal Man of Odisha' for nothing, Daitari Nayak chiselled through the mountain literally with his hands and carved a three kilometers long canal in his village, and put to rest forever the problem of irrigation and water by the sheer dint of his labour. Take the case of Abdul Ghafoor Khatri of Gujarat, who has done an amazing job of reviving the traditional Rogan painting form of Kutch. He is doing a great job of extending this rare painting art form to the present generation. I had gifted a Rogan painting titled 'Tree of Life' done by Abdul Gafoor, to the former President of USA, Mr. Barack Obama. Among the recipients of the Padma award, Shabbir Sayyed of Marathwada is known as the servant of Gau-Mata. The manner he has spent his entire life in the service of Gau-mata, is unique in itself. Madurai Chinna Pillai is the same person who at first tried to empower the downtrodden and the exploited through the Kalanjiyam movement in Tamil Nadu and initiated community based micro financing. America's Tao Porchon-Lynch will leave you astounded, Lynch has become a living institution of yoga today. Even at the age of , she is training yoga to people from all over the world and till now has trained as yoga teachers. Jamuna Tudu, famous nicknamed 'Lady Tarzan' in Jharkhand, most valiantly took on the Timber Mafia and Naxalites, and not only saved the hectares of forest but also inspired ten thousand women to unite and protect the trees and wildlife. It is a tribute to Jamuna ji's diligence that today, on the birth of every child, villagers plant trees. Also, trees are planted on the marriage of a girl in the village. The story of Muktaben Pankajkumar Dagali of Gujarat will fill you with inspiration despite being a divyang herself, it is difficult to find an example than what Muktaben did for the upliftment of divyang women by establishing the institution named Chakshu Mahila Sevakunj, through the medium of which she has been engaged in a virtuous endeavour to make visually challenged children self-reliant. The story of Kisan Chachi’, i.e. Farmer Aunty’ of Muzaffarpur in Bihar, or Rajkumari Devi is very inspiring. She has established a precedent in the direction of women empowerment and farming. Rajkumari Devi added women of her area to a 'Self Help Group' and motivated the entire lot become financially self-reliant. She not only trained the women of the village in pursuing other gainful means of employment, but most importantly she integrated technology with agriculture and my dear countrymen, it has perhaps happened for the first time, that in the roll of Padma awards bestowed this year, farmers have been the recipients. Generally, very few people associated with the agricultural world or those very few who can be labeled as real farmers have ever found their name in the list of Padmashree awards. This in itself presents the live and vibrant image of a changing India. My dear countrymen, today I wish to narrate a heart rending experience with you which I’ve been wanting to do past few days. At present, whenever I’m touring, it is my sincere effort to meet people beneficiaries of PMJAY’ scheme under Ayushman Bharat’s umbrella. PMJAY’ means to some of the beneficiaries, like the single mother whose unable to set her small children treated due to lack of money or the head of the family who was sustaining his family by the sweat of his brow and met with an accident and was unable to work, he too has benefitted due to this scheme, regained his health and is virtually living a new life! Brothers and Sisters, about lakh impoverished families have benefitted from this scheme over a period of last five months. I have found that it brings about a transformation in the life of the have-nots. If you know a poor person who is unable to procure treatment due to lack of money, do inform him about this scheme. In fact this scheme is meant for the benefit of such underprivileged people. My dear countrymen, exam time in schools throughout the nation is soon going to dawn upon us. In the next few weeks various education boards across the country will initiate the process for the board examinations of the tenth and twelfth standards. My best wishes to all the students who’re going to appear for their examinations, their parents and all the teachers as well. A few weeks ago, an immense event entitled 'Pariksha Pe Charcha' was organised in Delhi in the format of a Town Hall programme. In this Town Hall programme, I had the opportunity to talk with crores of students from India and abroad, and also with their parents and teachers; a possibility through the aegis of technology. One of the focal points of 'Pariksha Pe Charcha' was that there were lively interactions on various topics related with the entire process of examinations. There are many such aspects which emerged out of these discussions which are definitely going to be beneficial for the students. All the students, their teachers and parents can watch the recording of this entire event on YouTube, and I take this opportunity to wish all the best to all my ’exam warriors’, for their upcoming examinations. My dear countrymen, no mention of India can be complete without citing its festivals. It is just not possible that a day passes without any significance associated with it, or does not herald a festival! Our culture has a continuum spread over many millennia and it is a part of our heritage. In a few days from now, Mahashivrartri will be celebrated, and that too on a Monday, and when a Shivratri falls on a Monday, it becomes all that special in our heart of our hearts! I extend felicitations on this pious occasion of Mahashivratri to you all. My dear countrymen, some days ago I went to Kashi and there I got a chance to spend time with my divyang brothers and sisters. Many topics were discussed in their company and their confidence was really striking it was inspiring. During the conversation with one of them, a visually challenged young man, and he mentioned that he happened to be a stage artist, and specialized in mimicry during entertainment programs, so just like that I asked him as to who all he could imitate! And he told me that he could mimic the Prime Minister. So I requested a demonstration and a pleasant surprise was in store for me. He mimicked the very exact way I converse with you during Mann Ki Baat’. I was very happy to hear that people not only listen to Mann KI Baat’ but also remember it on many occasions. I was really impressed with the prowess of that divyang young man. My dear countrymen, connecting with all of you, courtesy the Mann Ki Baat’ program has been a really wonderful experience for me. Through radio I connect every month with millions of families. Many times while conversing with you, reading your letters or listening to your thoughts sent on the phone, I feel that you have adopted me as part of your family. This has been a very sublime experience for me. Friends, elections are the biggest celebration of democracy. In the next two months, we will be busy in the hurly-burly of the general elections. I myself will also be a candidate during this election. In maintaining respect for healthy democratic traditions, the next episode of Mann Ki Baat’ will be broadcast on the last Sunday of the month of May. This means I shall take up our thoughts and ideas accumulated over the three months of March, April entire May after the Elections, with confidence anew. With the power of your blessings, once again I shall begin this series of conversations through Mann Ki Baat’ and shall keep doing Mann Ki Baat’ with you for years. Once again, I thank all of you from the core of my heart. My Dear Countrymen, Namaskar On the st of this month, our Country received very sad news. Dr. Shri Shri Shri ShivaKumar Swamiji of District Tumukur, Karnataka was no more. ShivaKumar Swamiji dedicated his entire life to Social Service. Lord Basaveshwar has taught us, “Kayakave Kailas”” meaning discahrging one’s duties with due dilligence and persevereance is akin to being in the abode of Lord Shiva ie Kailasha Dham. ShivaKumar Swamiji was a true follower of this tenet ... during his life spanning a hundred and eleven years, he strived tirelessly towards the social, educational and economic upliftment of thousands of people . He was renowned to be a masterly scholar of languages such as English, Sanskrit and Kannada. He was a social reformer. He dedicated his life in ensuring that food, shelter, education and spiritual knowledge reached out to people. The welfare of farmers was a priority in his life. The Siddhganga Mutt regularily used to organise cattle and agricultural fairs. I have had the fortunate opportunity to be blessed by Swamiji, many a time. In the year on the occasion of the Centenary celebration of Sri Sri Sri Shivakumar Swamiji our former President Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam had paid a visit to Tumukur. On this occasion Kalam Saheb had recited a poem dedicated to revered Swamiji. I quote him: “O my Fellow Citizens In giving, you receive happiness, In Body and Soul- You have everything to give, If you have knowledge share it, If you have resources share them with the needy, You, your mind and heart. To remove the pain and suffering, and cheer the sad hearts. In giving, you receive happiness Almighty will bless, all your actions” Dr. Kalam Saheb’s poem potrays the life of Shri Shri Shri Shivakumar Swamiji and the mission of the Siddhganga Mutt beautifully. Once again, I pay tribute to this great man. My Dear Countrymen, On the th of January, , our Constitution came in to being; our Country was proclaimed a Republic. Yesterday, we celebrated Republic Day with pride and fervour. But today I want to speak to you on a totally different aspect. Our Country possesses a very important institution; besides being an integral part of our democracy, it is even older than our Republic I am referring to our Election Commission. The th of January was the Formation Day of the Election Commission, which is celebrated now as the National Voters’ Day. The scale at which elections are held in India is a matter of great awe for the World. It is natural for every Citizen to feel proud of the Election Commission of its meticulous organising abilities. Our Country leaves, no stone unturned to ensure that every citizen of India who is a registered voter, rightfully avails of the opportunity to cast his vote. Whereas we hear of a polling station at , feet above mean sea level in Himachal Pradesh we also learn about the same being organised in remote islands of the Andaman Nicobar archipelago. And you must have heard about Gujarat ... in a remote place in Gir forest, there is a polling booth for a sole voter. Just imagine ... for that one and only voter! These facts are bound to instil a sense of pride, of the commitment of the Election Commission. Caring for that lone voter, for ensuring that he or she enjoys full opportunity to exercise the right to vote, personnel of Election Commission travel to distant remote places to make necessary arrangements for the voting. This is the beauty of our democracy. I appreciate the Election Commission for relentlessly striving to ensure the strengthening of our democracy. I hold in high esteem, the Election Commissions of all states, security personnel and other staff members who contribute in ensuring strict adherence to free and fair polling. This year, our Country will undergo Lok Sabha elections. The first time ever, young persons born in the st Century will exercise their Right to Vote in the Lok Sabha Elections. They face the opportunity to shoulder responsibilities pertaining to the Country. They have embarked upon the journey of being partners in Nation building. The time has come for a confluence of individual dreams and the Nation’s dream. I urge the young generation to register themselves as voters, if they are eligible. All of us must realise that being a voter, earning the right to vote is an important rite of passage in one’s life; it’s one of its achievements. Simultaneously, the sentiment that voting is our sacred duty, should grow within us naturally. For any reason, if one is not able to vote, it should pain one. One should be saddened to witness any wrong taking place in the country. “I had not cast my vote ... that day I did not go and vote ... and as a result, my Country has borne the brunt “. We have to realise the importance of this responsibility of ours. This must be our leaning; this should be our disposition. This inclination should be ingrained within us like a sanskaar. I urge eminent people of the country to come forward and jointly contribute in campaigning for spreading awareness on voter registration and casting one’s vote on the day of polling. I sincerely hope that large numbers of eligible young people will get themselves registered as voters, thus forging a partnership in the quest to further strengthen our democracy. My Dear Countrymen, This great land, India, has given birth to innumerable great men, men whose deeds for the sake for humanity have been extraordinary, truly unforgettable. Our country is Bahuratna vasundhara’ ... the land of myriad gems. One among them was Netaji Subash Chandra Bose. On the rd of January, the country celebrated the birth anniversary of Netaji in an uncommon, special manner. On this occasion I was fortunate to get an opportunity to inaugurate a museum dedicated to heroes who fought in India’s freedom struggle. You may be aware of the fact that inside Red Fort, many chambers and structures lay locked unused for several decades after Independence. Those very chambers have now been turned into exquisite museums. A museum dedicated to Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and the Indian National Army; Yaad-e-Jalian, reminiscences of Jalianwala Bagh and India’s first war of Independence constitute the premises of Kranti Mandir’, that has been dedicated to the nation. Every inch, every brick of these museums is redolent with the fragrance of our glorious history. Tales of valour of the heroes of our freedom struggle emanating from every nook corner of these museums inspire us to delve deeper into our history. This was the very site where three heroic sons of Mother India Col. Prem Sehgal, Col. Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon and Major General Shahnawaz Khan had to face a trial under British Rule. On my visit to Kranti Mandir, Red Fort, as I was reflecting on memories of Netaji, his family members gifted me a special cap. There was a time when Netaji used to wear it. I dedicated that cap to the museum itself, for visitors to see and be inspired with the spirit of patriotism. The fact is, stories of the valour and patriotism of our heroes should be told and re-told to our newer generations in ways more than one. Just a month ago, on the th of December, I had gone to Andaman Nicobar islands. At an event, our tricolour was unfurled at the very site where Netaji Subhash Bose had unfurled it exactly years ago. In a similar manner, when the tricolour was hoisted at the Red Fort in October , it surprised everyone, since conventionally, this is done on the th of August. The occasion was the completion of years of the formation of the Azad Hind Government. Subhash Babu will always be remembered as a brave soldier and adept organiser; a valiant fighter who played a significant role in our Freedom Struggle. Through his clarion calls Dilli Chalo’, Tum mujhe Khoon do, main tumhe azadi doonga’, Netaji secured a special place in every Indian’s heart. That files associated with Netaji be declassified has been a long standing demand for years. And I am happy that we could manage to do the same. I remember the day when Netaji’s family paid a visit to the Prime Minister’s residence. We dwelt at length on myriad facets of Netaji Subhash Bose, offering him tributes. It gladdens me to see many places associated with illustrious sons of India being developed in Delhi. Be it , Alipur Road, associated with Babasaheb Ambedkar, or the Sardar Patel museum or the Kranti Mandir! Whenever you come to Delhi, you must pay a visit to these places. My dear countrymen, today as we refer to Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, that too in Mann Ki Baat’, I would like to share with you an incident from Netaji’s life. I have always considered Radio as an effective means of connecting with people. Similarly, Netaji shared a deep bond with the medium of Radio and he chose this very medium to converse with countrymen. In , Subhash Babu established Azad Hind Radio and through it he used to communicate with soldiers of the Indian National Army and other countrymen. Subhash Babu had a distinct style of opening a broadcast. In the opening he would begin with, “This is Subhash Chandra Bose speaking to you over the Azad Hind Radio...”. These words instantly stirred up listeners with a rush of a new energy, a new fervour. I am told this radio station also used to broadcast weekly news bulletins in English, Hindi, Tamil, Bangla, Marathi, Punjabi, Pashto Urdu languages. In managing the affairs of this radio station, a resident of Gujarat M.R. Vyas ji played a vital role. Programmes broadcast over Azad Hind Radio were very popular amongst the populace. Their programmes were a major source of inspiration strength to our freedom fighters. In this very Kranti Mandir, a visual arts museum has been established. India’s art culture has been portrayed here in a very attractive way. The museum has historical exhibitions which display more than paintings and artworks which are of three centuries vintage. Exquisite works of great artists such as Amrita Shergill, Raja Ravi Verma, Avanindranath Tagore, Gaganendranath Tagore, Nandalal Bose, Jamini Roy, Sailoz Mukherjee have been exhibited. And I also specially request you to visit the place and see for yourself the works of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore ji. Now you must be thinking that we are discussing art and here I’m talking about seeing Gurudev Tagore's excellent works of art. You have probably known Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore till date as a writer and a musician. But I would like to tell you that Gurudev was also a painter. He had painted upon many themes. He did paintings of many animals and birds, he also painted many landscapes, and not only that he also tried to depict many human characters by etching them on canvas. And the most unique aspect was that Gurudev Tagore did not ascribe any name to most of his works. He believed that the person seeing his painting should comprehend the painting in totality, from his own perspective, understand the message imparted by him in the particularpainting. His paintings have been on display in European countries, in Russia and in America. I hope you will go and see his paintings in the Kranti Mandir.’ My dear countrymen, India is a land of saints. Our saints have conveyed the message of goodwill, equality and social empowerment through their thoughts and deeds. One such Saint was - Sant Ravidas. On th February we will observe Ravidas Jayanti. The couplets or dohas’ of Sant Ravidas ji are very well-known. Sant Ravidas used to convey a profound message through the few lines of his couplet or doha.’ He had said “- , , ” Which would translate something like this that if you were to peel the stem of the banana tree, there appear leaves underneath which form the psuedostem, one can go peeling the leaves forming the stem till there isn’t any tree left at all ! Similarly man has been divided into castes and the human in him has disappeared. Sant Ravidas proposed that if God was present in every human being, then it was not fair to categorize him on the basis of caste, creed and other sociological demarcations. Guru Ravidas ji was born in the holy city of Varanasi. Sant Ravidas ji tried to explain the importance of labour and the worker throughout his life via his messages. It would not be wrong to say that he has illustrated to the entire world the real meaning of dignity of labour. He would say - “ ” That is, if your heart is pure, then the Absolute master resides within your heart. Sant Ravidas ji has influenced people cutting across every segment and class of the social milieu whether it was the Maharana of Chittor or his Queen or Meerabai, everyone was his follower were followers. I once again bow in reverence to Sant Ravidas ji. My dear countrymen, Kiran Sidar has written on MyGov that I should highlight the aspects of India's space program and its future. He also wants me to request the students to take interest in the space programs and to think out of the box and inspire them to go beyond the frontiers of the sky- Kiran ji, I appreciate your thoughts and especially the message being imparted to our children. A few days ago, I was in Ahmedabad, where I got the privilege of unveiling the statue of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai has had an important role in India's space program. Our space program has been possible due to innumerable young scientists of the country. We take pride in the fact that the satellites developed by our students and Sounding Rockets have reached space. On th January 'KALAM SAT' fashioned by our students had been launched. The Sounding Rockets made by Odisha university students have also created many records. The number of successful space missions attempted since the country's independence till have been equal to those successfully completed in the past four years. We have also created a world record for launching satellites simultaneously from the same spacecraft. We will soon register India’s presence on the moon through the Chandrayaan- campaign. Our country is also using Space Technology in devices employed in saving assets and life. Whether it is cyclone, or rail and road safety, all of these safety measures are being augmented by Space Technology. Among our fishermen, NAVIC devices are being distributed, which contribute in their economic development as well as ensure their safety. We are using Space Technology to improve delivery and accountability of government services. "Housing for all" or the "House for everyone" scheme involves geo-tagging of about lakh homes spread over states. Along with this scheme, about thirty and a half million properties under MNREGA have also been tagged. Today our satellites are a symbol of the country's growing might. It has contributed a great deal in fostering better relations with many countries of the world. South Asia Satellites has been a unique initiative, which has also gifted hues of development to our neighbouring Allies. Through its highly competitive launch services, India today not only propels satellites of developing countries but also those of developed nations. The sky and stars have always enthralled children. Our Space Program provides an impetus to the children to think big and reach across those boundaries, which were considered impossible till today. It is a vision to inspire the children to discover new stars, while gazing at them! My dear countrymen, I always say, those who play, also bloom and this time, many young players making their debut have bloomed in Khelo-India’. In January about , players participated in disciplines in the Khelo India Youth Games held in Pune. Only when the local ecosystem of our sports will be strong i.e. only when our base will be strong, then only our youth will be able to perform their best in the country and across the world. When the player performs his best at the local level,only then, he also shines globally. This time in 'Khelo India', participants from every state have performed well at their individual level. The life of many a medal winner is also immensely inspiring. I was reading that young Akash Gorkha who won a silver medal in boxing had his father, Ramesh Ji working as a watchman in a complex in Pune. They live in a parking shed with their family. The captain of Maharashtra Under- Women's Kabaddi team, Sonali Helvi is from Satara. She lost her father at a very young age, and her brother and mother encouraged the talent and skills of Sonali. It is often seen that girls are not encouraged much to participate in sports such as Kabaddi. In spite of the hurdles, Sonali not only chose Kabaddi but excelled in this discipline. -year-old Abhinav Shaw hailing from Asansol is the youngest gold medallist in the Khelo India Games. A farmer's daughter, Akshaya Basavani Kamat, from Karnataka won a gold medal in weightlifting. She credited her victory to her father, a farmer in Belgaum. When we talk about the creation of a New India, then determination exhibited by our youth is the veritable example of what is New India! These inspiring stories from the annals of Khelo India,’ are ample proof , that the building of New India does not only involve contribution from the denizens of big cities but also from the youth, children, young sports talents, hailing from small cities, towns and villages. My dear countrymen, you must have heard about many a prestigious beauty contest. But have you heard about the Shining Toilet’ contest Over the past month, more than lakh toilets have participated in this unique contest. The name of this unique contest is "Clean beautiful Toilet". People are making their toilets clean and colourful, by having them painted and other rennovations, you will find lots of photos of such toilets participating in the "Clean beautiful Toilet" contest spread from Kanya Kumari to Kutchh till Kamrup on social media. I appeal to all the Sarpanchs and village heads to take a lead in this campaign in their respective Panchayats. And do share your "clean beautiful toilet" photos with me on MylzzatGhar on social media. Friends together, on October , , we had embarked on a memorable journey together to clean our country and to get rid of open defecation. Due to the unequivocal support from the people of India, today India is moving towards liberation from defecation in the open much prior to October , , so that we may pay our homage to Bapu on his th birth anniversary. In this memorable journey of clean India, listeners have also contributed a lot to the Mann Ki Baat' forum and that is why I’m happy to share the fact that more than five lakh fifty thousand villages and districts have declared themselves free of open defecation and sanitation coverage has crossed limit in rural India whereas latrines have been provided to nearly nine crore households. My younger friends, the days of examinations are approaching . Anshul Sharma, resident of Himachal Pradesh has written on MyGov that I should talk about examinations and Exam Warriors. Anshul ji, I thank you for raising this issue. Yes, for many families, the first part of the year is Exam Season. Students, their parents and teachers, all are engaged in tasks related to examinations. I wish all the students, their parents and teachers all the best. I would have liked to discuss this topic at length in Mann Ki Baat’ of today, but you will be happy to know that just after a gap of two days ,on January , at am, in the 'Pariksha Pe Charcha' program, I am going to interact with students from all over the country, and this time, along with the students, their parents and teachers are also going to be part of this program.And this time, students from other countries will also participate. In this 'Pariksha Pe Charcha' program, I will touch upon a lot of things related to all the facets of examinations with my young friends, especially on the topic of stress free exams. I had urged people to send me thir inputs and ideas with regard to this programme; and I am very happy that a large number of people are sharing their thoughts on MyGov. Some of these ideas and suggestions I will definitely put in front of you during the Town Hall program. You must also try to become a part of this program ...... and through social media and Namo App, you can also see its live telecast. My dear countrymen th January is the death anniversary of revered Bapu. At am the whole country pays homage to the martyrs. Wherever we are, we must pay two minutes tribute to our martyrs. Remember our revered Bapu and take a vow to fulfill the dreams of Pujya Bapu, to build a new India, and to fulfill our duties as a citizen let us move forward with this resolution. Let us ensure this journey of remains successful. Many many felicitations and thanks to all of you. My Dear countrymen, Namaskar. The year is about to conclude. We shall soon enter . At such a juncture, it is natural to reflect on the year gone by; it is equally so, to hear about resolutions for the year being ushered in. Whether it be the life of an individual, the life of a society at large or the life of a Nation collectively, everybody has to look back ponder; at the same time one has to try look forward to the best extent possible. Only then can the gains of experience be availed of, only then can one’s self-confidence renew further. What exactly should we do in order to ensure a change in our lives, simultaneously contributing our bit in taking our country society forward Many good wishes to all of you for the year . You must have wondered how to keep etched in your memory! It is important to bear in mind HOW India as a country, as a collective entity powered by the might of a hundred thirty crore people remembers the year ; something that swells our hearts with pride. The year saw the launching of the world’s biggest health insurance scheme Ayushman Bharat’. Electricity reached each every village of the country this year. Noted world institutions have accepted that the country has taken strides in the area of poverty alleviation at a record pace. On account of the unwavering resolve of our countrymen, swachchata, sanitation coverage is rapidly advancing towards crossing the mark. After Independence, for the first time ever, the tricolor was hoisted at Red Fort on the th anniversary of the formation of the Azad Hind Government. In honour of SardarVallabhbhai Patel who bonded the entire country around a common thread of unity, India witnessed the coming up of the tallest statue in the world, Statue of Unity’. The country secured a place of pride glory in the entire world. The highest United Nations Environment Award Champions of the Earth’ was conferred upon India. The world duly took notice of India’s efforts in the areas of Solar Energy Climate Change. The first General Assembly of the International Solar Alliance was held in India. It is due to our collective efforts that our country has seen unprecedented improvement in the Ease of doing business’ rankings. The country’s self defence mechanism got further reinforced. It was during this very year that our country has successfully accomplished the Nuclear Triad, which means we are now armed with nuclear capabilities-in water, on land and in the sky as well. Daughters of the country have done her proud by circumnavigating the globe through the NavikaSagarParikrama. India’s first inland waterway was launched in Varanasi. This has laid the foundation of a new revolution in the waterways sector. The longest rail-road bridge, Bogibeel Bridge was dedicated to the Nation- Sikkim’s first India’s hundredth airport, Pakyong commenced operations. India scripted a thumping win in the under- Cricket World Cup and the Blind Cricket World Cup. This time, India clinched a large number of medals in the Asian Games. India also performed very well in the Para Asian Games too. By the way, if I continue enumerating examples of the Purusharth, the character the mettle of Indians, or those of our collective endeavour, this episode of Mann Ki Baat will go on and on, perhaps to the point when makes an entry! And all this has been possible due to the relentless efforts of a crore countrymen. I sincerely hope that India’s journey on the path of advancement progress continues through too. Taking her to newer heights with her inner strengths. My dear countrymen, this December we had to bear the loss of some extraordinary, exemplary countrymen. On the th of December, Dr. Jayachandran passed away in Chennai. People fondly called him MakkalMaaruthuvar’ since he had a special place in their hearts. Dr. Jayachandran was known for his efforts of making the most economical treatment possible available to the poor. People tell us that he would be ever ready eager, when it came to treatment of patients. In the case of elderly patients, he would even bear the cost of their travelling to and fro. On the betterindia.com website, I have read about many of his endeavours that serve as an inspiration to society. On similar lines, on the th of December, I learnt of the loss of SulagittiNarsamma in Karnataka. SulagittiNarsamma was a midwife, aiding pregnant women during childbirth. In Karnataka, especially in far-off, remote places, thousands of women availed of her services. In the beginning of this year, she was honoured with a Padma Shri. There are many exemplary personalities such as Dr. Jaya Chandran and SulagittiNarsamma, who dedicated their lives to the welfare of all in society. Since we are referring to healthcare, I would like to mention the social endeavour of doctors in Bijnor, Uttar Pradesh. Recently, I was told by some of our party workers that a few young doctors in the town set up camps offering free treatment for the underprivileged. Every month, the Heart Lungs Critical Centre there organizes such camps, where free diagnosis and treatment for a host of ailments is done. Every month, hundreds of poor patients are benefitting from these camps. The dedication of these doctor friends engaged in selfless service is truly worthy of praise. Today, I’m saying it with pride that it was collective efforts that made the Swachch Bharat Mission’ a successful campaign. I was told that a few days ago, in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, over three lakh people came together to work for the sanitation campaign. In this Mahayagya’, grand undertaking, the Municipal Corporation, voluntary bodies, School- College students, the people of Jabalpur; in fact everyone participated with enthusiasm Zest. I just referred to the betterindia.com, where I got to read about Dr. Jaya Chandran. Whenever I get the opportunity, I visit the better India website and try to know more about such shining, inspiring deeds. I am glad to observe that these days, there are many websites apprising us of inspiring life- stories of such remarkable gems. Just as thepoitiveindia.com is doing great work in spreading positivity and infusing more sensitivity into society. Similarly, success stories of young innovators entrepreneurs are women beautifully on yourstory.com. In the same way, you can easily learn the Sanskrit language sitting at home through samskritabharati.in. Can we join hands in one endeavour.. Let us share such websites amongst ourselves. Let’s come together to make positivity viral. I do believe that by doing so more and more people will get to know about our heroes who brought a change in society. Spreading negativity is fairly easy. But some really good work is being done around us, in our society. And all this has been possible through the collective efforts of a crore countrymen. Sports has its own significance in every society. When a game is being played, the spectators too experience a rush of energy in their beings. We observe name, fame and laurels when it comes to sportspersons. But, at times, in the background, there exist many things that are much higher, much greater than the world of sports. Let me tell you about one of our daughters from Kashmir who won a gold medal in a Karate Championship in Korea. Hanaya is years old and lives in Anantnag, Kashmir. Hanaya trained hard in Karate with perseverance fervor, studied its nuances and proved herself. On behalf of all countrymen, I wish her a bright future. Best wishes and blessings to Hanaya. Similarly, the media discussed extensively about the year old Rajani. You too must have read it. Rajani has won a gold medal at the Junior Women’s Boxing Championship. The moment Rajani won the medal she rushed to a nearby milk stall drank a glass of milk. After that, she wrapped a cloth around the medal kept it in a bag. You must be wondering why Rajani did that ! She did it in honour of her father Jasmer Singh ji who sells lassi, at a stall in Panipat. According to Rajani, her father has sacrificed a lot, undergone hardships to help her reach where she is. Early every morning, Jasmer Singh used to leave for work before Rajani and her siblings woke up. When Rajani approached her father, expressing her wish to learn boxing, he encouraged her, arranging for whatever possible resources that he could. Rajani had to start her training in boxing with old gloves, since those days, the family was not too well, financially. Despite so many hurdles, Rajani did not lose heart went ahead with her training in boxing. She has won a medal in Serbia too. My best wishes and blessings to Rajani. I also congratulate her parents Jasmer Singh ji and Usha Rani Ji for supporting encouraging Rajani. This very month, year old Vedangi Kulkarni from Pune became the fastest Asian to traverse the globe riding a bicycle. She rode for days, covering around kilometres every day. Just imagine kms of cycling every day ! Her passion for cycling is indeed commendable. Don’t news of such achievements, such accomplishments inspire us Especially my young friends, when we hear about such feats, we derive inspiration to touch heights despite obstacles. If your resolve is strong, if your fervor, your enthusiasm is without bounds, all your hurdles halt in their tracks. Hardships can never turn into obstacles. When we come to know of such examples, we too feel inspired every moment of our life. My dear countrymen, the month of January ushers in many festivals filled with hope joy- such as Lohri, Pongal, MakrSankranti, Uttarayan, MaghBihu, Maaghi; on the occasion of these festivities, the length breadth of India will be replete with the verve of traditional dances at places, the embers of Lohri symbolizing the joy of a bountiful harvest at others. Somewhere the skies dotted with colourful flying kites, elsewhere the funfilled air of a mela or carnival. The spirit of Sports games will come to the fore and at places, people will joyfully feed each other tilgur sesame jaggery people will be heard exchanging the greeting phrase Tilgurghyaaanigorgor bola’! All these festivals may carry different names but the underlying or inherent feeling of celebrating them is singular - these are harvest festivals and somewhere or the other are connected with crops and farming, connected with the farmer, with the village and with our barns. It is during this period that the sun enters Uttarayan due to Northward movement of the earth on the celestial sphere and enters the Makardasha. It is during this period that days begin to lengthen and the winter harvesting of our crops begins. Best wishes to our food providers, the farming brothers and sisters. Our festivals are replete with fragrance of the essence of Unity in Diversity and the spirit of One India Great India. We can witness how closely our festivals are interlinked with nature. In Indian culture society and nature are indistinguishable, in our culture the person and his environment are considered in totality. A great example of the interconnection between us and Nature is the calendar based on our festivals. It comprises festivals all around the year as well as the movements of the celestial bodies. This traditional calendar depicts our bonding with natural and astronomical events. The lunar and solar Calendars based on the movement of earth with respect to moon and sun decide the occurrence and dates of our festivals. It is also dependant on the fact which calendar you follow. In many regions the position of the planetary constellations determines the occurrence and celebration of festivals. GudiPadva, Chettichand, Ugadi and others are all celebrated according to the lunar Calendar, whereas Tamil PutanduVishnu, Baisakh, Baisakhi, PoilaBoisakh, Bihu are all celebrated in accordance with solar calendar. The sagacity of conserving rivers and water is inherently reflected in many of our festivals. Chhath festival is associated with the worship of the sun, rivers and ponds. Millions of people take a dip in the holy rivers on theoccasion of MakarSankranti. Our festivals, impart to us many social values. On the one hand, where they have mythological significance, on the other, every festival quite easily in itself teaches the important lesson of life - the value of staying together, imbued with a feeling of brotherhood. I wish all of you a great year and do hope that you all to enjoy the oncoming festive season. Doo share the photographs taken on these festivals with one another so that everyone can witness the diversity of India and the beauty of Indian culture. My dear countrymen, there is an abundance of events in our culture, of which we can be proud and display them in the entire world with pride - and one of them is the Kumbh Mela. You must have heard a lot about Kumbh. Even in films, a lot is exhibited regarding its grandeur and magnificence and most truly so, the dimensions ofKumbh are vast supremely divine, as much magnificent. People from all over the country and around the world come and participate in the Kumbh. In the Kumbh Mela, there is a tidal upsurge of faith and reverence. Millions and millions of people from India and around the world congregate at one place. The tradition of Kumbh has bloomed and flourished as part of our great cultural heritage. This time the world famous Kumbh Mela is going to be held in Prayagraj from January , and many of you might be waiting eagerly for it to take place. The process of Sant- Mahatmas converging at the Kumbh Mela has already started. It is a measure of its global importance that last year UNESCO has marked Kumbh Mela in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. A few days ago the Ambassadors of many countries witnessed for themselves the preparations for Kumbh. The national flags of many countries were together hoisted at the Kumbh. The festival of Kumbh, to be organized in Prayagraj, is expected to have footfalls from more than countries; the divinity emanating from Kumbhwill spread the colours of India's splendour throughout the world. Kumbh Mela is also a huge medium of self discovery, where every visitor experiences a unique feeling and learns to look at the worldly things from a spiritual perspective. This can be a huge learning experience especially for the youth. I myself went to Prayagraj a few days ago and saw that the preparations for the Kumbh were progressing on a war footing. People of Prayagraj are also very enthusiastic about the Kumbh. I inaugrated the Integrated Command Control Center at the Kumbh which will be of great benefit to the devotees. This time much emphasis is being laid on cleanliness during Kumbh. If during the course of this event sanitation prevails along with reverence, then it will lead to a positive message reaching far and wide. This time every devotee will be able to have a darshan of the pious Akshayavat after the holy dip in the confluence. This great symbol of people’s faith was locked up in the fort for hundreds of years, due to which the devotees despite a deep seated desire could not get a glimpse of. Now the entrance gate of Akshayavat have been opened for everyone. I urge all of you to share different aspects of Kumbh and photos on social media when you go to Kumbh so that more and more people feel inspired to go to Kumbh. May this Kumbh of Spirituality become Mahakumbh of Indian Philosophy. May this Kumbh of faith also become Mahakumbh of ofnationalism. And a Mahakumbh of National integration May this Kumbh of the devotees also become Mahakumbh of global tourists. May this Kumbh of aesthetics also become the Mahakumbh of creativity. My dear countrymen, there is a lot of curiosity regardingthe celebration of RepublicDay on th January, when we remember those great men who gave us our Constitution.This year we are celebrating the th birth anniversary of revered Bapu. We are fortunate that South African President Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa is going to grace the Republic Day celebrations as chief guest. Our revered Bapu and South Africa shared an unbreakable bond. It was South Africa, where Mohan transformed into the 'Mahatma'. It was in South Africa, where Mahatma Gandhi had started his first Satyagraha and stood rock steady in protest of apartheid. He also founded the Phoenix and Tolstoy Farms, from where the demand for peace and justice echoed to the whole world. The year is also being celebrated as Birth centenary of Nelson Mandela,also known as 'Madiba'. We all know that Nelson Mandela was the role model of struggle against racism all over the world and who was the inspiration for Mandela He derivedinspiration and endurancefor spending many years in jail from Bapu himself. Mandela said this about Bapu - "Mahatma is an integral part of our history, because it was here that he used his first experiment with truth; It was here, That he had displayed a great deal of determination for justice; It was here, he developed the philosophy of his satyagraha and his methods of struggle. "Mandela used to consider Bapu as his role model. Both Bapu and Mandela are not only sources of inspiration for the entire world, but their ideals have always encouraged us to create a society full of love and compassion. My dear countrymen, a few days ago, a DGP conference was held at Kevdia on the banks of Narbada in Gujarat, where the world's highest statue 'Statue of Unity' is situated, there I had a meaningful discussion with the top policemen of the country. What kind of steps should be taken to strengthen the security of the country and that of the countrymen, was discussed in detail. At the same conference, I also announced the awarding of 'Sardar Patel Award' for National Integration to be given to those who have contributed for national unity in any form. Sardar Patel dedicated his entire life for the unity of the country. He always remained engaged in keeping India's integrity intact. SardarSaheb believed that the power of India lay in the diversity of the land. It is our way of paying homage to Sardar Patel's aspirations through this award for National Integration. My dear countrymen, January is the date ofthe sacred festival observed in honour of Guru Gobind Singh ji’s birth anniversary. Guru Gobind Singh Ji was born in Patna. For most of his life, his work was centred in North India and he sacrificed his life in Nanded, Maharashtra. His birthplace was Patna, Karmabhoomi was north India and the last moments were spent in Nanded. In a way, entire India received his blessings. A glimpse of his life span reflects a glimpse of the entire India. After the martyrdom of his father Shri Guru TeghBahadurji, Guru Gobind Singh Ji attained the hallowed position of the Guru at a tender ageof nine years. Guru Gobind Singh ji had inherited courage to fight for justice from the legacy of Sikh Gurus. He was bestowed with a quiet and simple personality, but whenever, an attempt was made to suppress the voice of the poor and the weak, or injustice was done to them, then Guru Gobind Singh ji raised his voice firmly for the poor and the weak and therefore it is said - "I can make one fight against one hundred and fifteen thousands, I can make the sparrow fight against the hawk That be the reason that Gobindsingh be my name.” He used to preach that strength cannot be demonstrated by fighting against the weaker sections. Shri Gobind Singh Ji believed that the biggest service is to alleviate human suffering. He was a divine figure full of heroism, valor, courage, sacrifice and devotion. He had beatific knowledge of both weapons andShaastras. He was an archer, and a pundit of Gurmukhi, BrajBhasha, Sanskrit, Persian, Hindi and Urdu and many other languages. I once again bow paying my obeisance to Shri Guru Gobind Singh ji. My dear countrymen, there are many good events happening in the country, which are not widely discussed. Such a unique effort is being attempted by F.S.S.A.I viz Food Safety and Standard Authority of India. Many programs are being organized across the country in celebration of the th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. In this regard F.SA.A.I. is engaged in promoting good eating or Safe and Healthy Diet habits. Under the aegis of "Eat Right India" campaign, Swasth Bharat’ trips are being carried out across the country. These campaigns will last till Jan th. At times, government organizations are tagged as a regulator, but it is commendable that F.SA.A.I has been working beyond this brief for public awareness and public education. A clean and healthy India will spell a prosperous India also. Nutritious food is most essential for good health. In this context, I extend hearty greetings to F.S.S.A.I for this initiative. I urge you to the utmost, let's join this initiative. You should participate in this initiative and especially I urge you to make you children witness these campaigns. The education regarding importance of food is essential right from childhood. My dear countrymen, this is the last episode of the year , we will meet again in , and will engage in another episode of Mann Ki Baat. Whether it is the life of a person, life of a nation, or the lifespan of a society, inspiration, is the basis of progress. Come, imbued with renewed inspiration, renewed zeal, renewed resolution, new accomplishments, loftier goals let’s move on, keep moving, change oneself and change the country too. Thank you very much. My dear countrymen, Namaskar. On the rd of October, , the pious occasion of Vijayadashmi, we embarked upon a journey together through the medium of Mann Ki Baat’. This journey has reached its th episode today. Thus, this Golden Jubilee Episode is indeed gilt-edged in every sense of the term. Your letters and phone calls this time pertain mostly to these episodes. Anshu Kumar Amar Kumar from Delhi on Mygov, Vikas Yadav from Patna; on similar lines Monica Jain from Delhi, Prosenjit Sarkar from Bardhaman, West Bengal and Sangeeta Shastri from Nagpur converge in asking a shared question. They are of the view that broadly speaking, their Prime Minister being associated with the latest in technology, Social Media and Mobile Apps; WHY did he choose radio as a medium to connect with his countrymen Your curiosity is but natural; in this age when Radio was fading into oblivion, why did Modi opt for the airwaves Let me quote an incident. The year was . I was then a party worker with the Bharatiya Janata Party organization in Himachal. It was the month of May; and I was travelling to a certain place. Evenings tend to get cold in the hilly terrain of Himachal Pradesh, and I stopped by at a wayside tea stall and placed an order for tea. It was a tiny joint; there was only one person who would make serve tea. He was not even adequately clad; it was a standalone kiosk on the edge of the road. He first picked up a Laddoo from a glass container, offered the sweetmeat to me said, “Sir, eat this before the tea get ready”. I was taken aback and asked him “What is the matter Is it in celebration of an occasion like a wedding” He replied, “No brother, nothing like that! Don’t you know It’s a momentous, joyous occasion”. On seeing his rather jubilant exuberance, I asked him, “But what exactly happened” And he replied, “India has exploded the bomb today!” I exclaimed, “India has exploded the bomb! I don’t get it!” Said he “Sir, just listen to the radio”. Indeed, that exactly was the topic of discussion on the radio. It was then that he elaborated on how on the day of the nuclear test, the then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee had announced to the Media and how he broke into a dance on listening to it on the radio. It was matter of great intrigue to me to see a lone tea seller in a remote, snow - clad hilly place, who possibly kept listening to the radio the entire day watching that particular effect of the news on radio led me to realize internalise that this was a medium that was truly connected with the masses and that it was a mighty means of getting across. In terms of the reach depth of communication, radio has been incomparable. I have been nursing that feeling ever since, acknowledging its power strength. Hence when I became the Prime Minister, it was natural for me to turn towards a strong, effective medium. And in , when I took charge as the Pradhan Sevak, Principal Servant, it was my wish to reach out to the masses with the glorious saga of our country’s unity, her grand history, her valour, India’s diversity, our cultural diversity, virtues embedded in our society such as Purusharth, Tapasya, Passion sacrifice; in a nutshell, the great story of India. From remote villages to Metro cities, from farmers to young professionals the array just prompted me to embark upon this journey of Mann Ki Baat’. Every month, we would read letters to the tune of lakhs, listen to phone calls, watch comments on the App Mygov. Weaving a common thread comprising them all into a fabric of informal conversation, we have been able to travel together, over this rather long distance of episodes. Recently, All India Radio got a survey done on Mann Ki Baat’. I came across some feedback that is very interesting. Out of the designated sample in the survey, of respondents on an average happen to be listeners who regularly tune in to ’Mann Ki Baat’. Most people believe that the greatest contribution of Mann Ki Baat’ has been the enhancement of a feeling of positivity in our society. The medium of Mann Ki Baat’ has promoted many a mass revolution. indiapositive has been the subject of quite an extensive discussion. This is an exemplary glimpse of the feeling of positivity, innate to our countrymen. People have shared their experiences, conveying the rise of selfless volunteerism as a consequence of Mann Ki Baat’. It is a change where people are increasingly willing to contribute for the sake of service to society. I am overjoyed on account of the fact that through Mann Ki Baat’, radio is rising as a popular medium, more than ever before. But it’s not about just radio people are connecting with this programme and ensuring their participation through T.V., FM Radio, Mobile, Internet, Facebook Live; along with periscope, through the NarendraModiApp too. I express my gratitude to the entire family of Mann Ki Baat’ for being a part of it trusting it wholeheartedly. Thank you very much for your phone call. Your apprehension is not misplaced. The fact is, if a leader gets hold of a microphone with assured listeners to the tune of millions, what else does he need Significantly, some young friends have attempted a study on the myriad subjects touched upon, over the many episodes of Mann Ki Baat’. They did a lexical analysis of all the episodes to calculate the frequency of occurrence of particular words; whether there were some words that were oft-repeated! One of their findings was that, this programme has remained apolitical. When Mann Ki Baat’ commenced, I had firmly decided that it would carry nothing political, or any praise for the Government, nor Modi for that matter anywhere. The greatest bulwark in ensuring adherence to my resolve; in fact my highest inspiration, have been YOU. As a run up to each episode of Mann Ki Baat’, the expectations aspirations of listeners through their letters, online comments phone calls are crystal clear. Modi may come and go, but this country will never let go of its UNITY permanence, our culture will always be immortal. These minute stories encompassing a crore countrymen will always stay alive. This new inspiration zest will keep taking her to greater heights. At times, when I look back, I am taken aback. Sometimes people who write in from different corners of the country say, “We should not haggle beyond limits with marginal shopkeepers, auto drivers, vegetable sellers et al”. I read a letter then try to weave it with the essence of a similar letter. I would like to share a couple of personal experiences with you who knows how soon these will reach our families; who knows when social media will circulate them to usher in a revolution!. The stories that you’ve sent across in the context of cleanliness, myriad examples of common folk you never know where a tiny brand ambassador of cleanliness comes into being in various homes; someone who reprimands elders at home; or even admonishingly orders the Prime Minister through a phone call! Who would have imagined that a small campaign “selfie with daughter” starting from a small village in Haryana would spread not only throughout the country but also across other countries as well. Every section of the society including celebrities joined in to ignite a process of transformation in a new modern language of change that the present generation understands and follows. At times Mann Ki Baat is also sneered at but crore countrymen ever occupy a special pleace in my heart. Their hearts and my heart beat to the same rhythm. Mann Ki Baat is not about the Government it is about the society. Mann Ki Baat addresses an aspirational India, an ambitious India. Politics or Political Power are not intrinsic to the Indian ethos; on the contrary social values and society are. In fact, Politics is one of the numerous other aspects of social life. Making politics an all pervasive, powerful factor is not an effective way for a healthy society. At times, political developments and political people assume such overriding prominence that other talents and courageous deeds get overshadowed. For ensuring a bright future for a country such as India, it is our collective responsibility to acknowledge and honour the common man’s talent and deeds and Mann Ki Baat is a humble and modest effort in this direction. Many thanks for your phone call. In a way your question were the a personal, amiable touch. I believe that the biggest achievement of the episodes of Mann Ki Baat is that one feels like talking to a close acquaintance and not to the Prime Minister, and this is true democracy. If I reply to the question asked by you straightaway then I will say that I do not make any preparation. Actually, Mann Ki Baat is a very simple task for me. Every time before Mann Ki Baat, letters are received from people; people share their ideas and view points on Mygov and Narendra Modi Mobile App and there is also a toll free number ; and by calling on this number, people record messages in their own voice. My effort is that I read the maximum number of these letters and comments myself before Mann Ki Baat. I listen to many phone calls too. And as the episode of Mann Ki Baat draws closer, I read ideas and inputs sent by you very minutely while travelling. My countrymen stay in my heart every moment and that is how the writer’s situation and ideas expressed in the letter become part of my thought process. That letter does not remain a mere a piece of paper for me. As it is I have spent close to to years as a travelling mendicant and have been to most of the districts in our country including the remotest once where I spent a lot of time. That is why I am able to relate myself to the place and context of the letter. Then, I note down facts like the name of the village and of the person. Honestly speaking, Mann Ki Baat carries my voice but the examples, emotions and spirit represent my countrymen, I thank every person contributing to Mann Ki Baat. There are lakhs of persons whose names I have not been able to include in Mann Ki Baat but without any disappointment, they continue to send in their letters and comments. I firmly believe that your ideas and your views will continue reaching me in even greater numbers and will help make Mann Ki Baat more interesting, effective and useful. An effort is also made that the concerned department should pay attention to such letters and comments which, somehow, could not be included in Mann Ki Baat. I also thank my colleagues from All India Radio, FM Radio, Doordarshan, other TV Channels and the Social Media. It is due to their hard work that Mann Ki Baat reaches maximum number of people. The team from All India Radio prepares each episode for broadcast in a number of regional languages. Some of them very aptly narrate in a voice and style resembling that of Modi’s. In this way for those minutes they become Narendra Modi. I congratulate and thank those persons for their talent and skills. I would request all of you also to kindly listen to this programme in your regional language as well. I sincerely thank from the core of my heart my friends in the media who regularly telecast Mann Ki Baat on their channels. No political person is ever happy with the media, he feels that he is getting a very little coverage or the coverage given to him is negative. But many issues raised in Mann Ki Baat have been adopted by the media. Issues such as cleanliness, Road safety, drugs free India, selfie with daughter have been taken up by the media and turn into campaigns. TV channels made it the most watched radio programme I sincerely thank and congratulate the media. Without your contribution and cooperation, this journey of Mann Ki Baat would have been incomplete. Nidhi ji, many thanks for your phone call! To tell you the truth, I have no such secret. What I am doing must be happening in families as well. In simple words, I may say that I try to cast myself into the mould of that young man, and put myself under his conditions and try to adjust and match the wave length accordingly. There are old baggage’s of our own lives and when they do not come in the way, it becomes easier to understand others. Sometimes our inhibitions or prejudices become a big hurdle in communication. I prefer to understand the other man’s point of view rather than going through the process of acceptance, rejection and reaction. My experience has been that by adopting this approach, the other side also tries to come to our wave length rather than arguing or creating pressure in order to convince thereby removing the communication gap and both sides become co-travelers in our journey of idea-sharing. None of the two even realizes that how and when one other’s has abandoned its idea and accepted and owned the idea of the other side. Today’s youths have this special quality that they won’t do anything which they do not believe themselves and whenever they believe in something, they follow that leaving everything else. People generally talk of a communication gap between the elders and teenagers in the family. In fact, the scope of discussion with teenagers is quite limited in most of the families. Most of the time these talks remain limited to studies, habits or life style and the “do’s” and “don’ts”. An open discussion without any expectations is gradually on the decline and this too is a matter of concern. Communication will be more effective if we “accept” instead of “expect” and “discuss” instead of “dismiss”. My effort is to have a continuous dialogue with the youth in various programmes or through social media. I try to learn from whatever they are doing or whatever they are thinking. They are storehouse of ideas. They are extremely energetic, innovative and focused. I try to share the efforts and achievements of the youth as much as possible through “Mann Ki Baat”. There is a general complaint that the younger generation asks too many questions. I say it is good that the youth ask questions. It is good as it shows that they want to analyse everything from its very root. Some people say that the youth do not have patience but my belief is that the youth do not have any time to waste- this is the point which helps the present day youth become more innovative because they want to accomplish things quickly. We feel that the youths are very ambitious today and they plan big. I feel it is good, dream big and achieve bigger successes; after all, this is “the New India”. Some people say that the younger generation wants to accomplish a many things at a time. I say what is wrong in it. They do so because they are adept in multitasking. If we just look around, we find that it is the youth who are bringing in transformation of society in a big way, may it be social entrepreneurship, start-ups, sports or any other field. Those youth who have dared to ask questions and have had the courage to dream big. If we put these ideas of our youth into practice and provide them conducive environment to express themselves, they surely will bring about a constructive and a positive change in the country- they are already doing so. My dear countrymen, Vineeta ji from Gurugram- has posted on MyGov that in Mann Ki Baat I should talk about the “Constitution Day” which falls on the th November. She says that this day is special because we are going to enter into the th year of our Constitution adoption. Thank you very much for your suggestion Vineeta ji. Yes, tomorrow is the Constitution Day. A day to remember those great personalities who drafted our Constitution. Our Constitution was adopted on th November, . The Constituent Assembly took years months and days to accomplish this stupendous task of drafting the Constitution. Just imagine, these luminaries gave us such a comprehensive and detailed Constitution within a period of just less than years. The extraordinary pace at which they drafted the Constitution is an example of Time Management and productivity to emulate even today. This also inspires us to accomplish our responsibilities within a record time. The Constituent Assembly was an amalgamation of the great talents of the country, each one of them was committed to provide a Constitution to the country which empowers the people of India and enriches even the poorest of the poor. The unique point in our Constitution is that the rights and duties have been very comprehensively detailed. A balance between these two in the lives of our citizens will take our nation forward. If we respect the rights of others, our rights will automatically get protected and similarly if we fulfill our duties, then also our rights will get automatically protected. I still remember that in when years of the adoption of the Constitution were being celebrated, we had taken out a procession by placing our Constitution atop an elephant. This has been a memorable incident to increase awareness about our Constitution among the youth and to connect them to the various aspects of the Constitution. In the year , we shall complete years as a Republic and in , we shall enter th year of our Independence. Let us all take forward the values enshrined in our Constitution and ensure Peace, Progress and Prosperity in our country. My dear countrymen, while talking about the Constituent Assembly, the contribution of that great man cannot be forgotten who played a pivotal role in the Constituent Assembly. This great man was none other than our revered Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar. His death anniversary or mahaparirvan divas falls on th December. I, on behalf of all countrymen, pay my homage to Baba Saheb who gave the right to live with dignity to crores of Indians. Democracy was embedded deep in Baba Saheb’s nature and he used to say that India’s democratic values have not been imported from outside. What is a republic and what is a parliamentary system- are nothing new to India. He had made a very moving appeal in the Constituent Assembly that we have to safeguard our hard fought democracy till the last drop of our blood. He also used to say that we, Indians may be from different background but, yes, we shall have to keep the national interest above all the other things. “India First” was the basic doctrine of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar. Once again my humble tribute to revered Baba Saheb. My dear countrymen, two days back on rd November, we all celebrated Shri Guru Nanak Dev Jayanti and next year in we shall be celebrating his th Prakash Parv. Guru Nanak Dev Ji always envisaged the welfare of entire humanity. He always showed the path of truth, work, service, kindness and amity to the society. The country will observe Guru Nahak Dev Ji’s th birth anniversary in a grand way, its soothing colours will not only spread in India alone but will get sprinkled the world over. All states and Union Territories have been requested to celebrate the occasion in a grand manner. Guru Nanak Dev Ji’s th Prakash Parv will be celebrated in a similar manner in all the countries of the world as well. Besides, a train will be run on a route joining all the holy places connected with Guru Nanak Dev ji. Recently, while holding a meeting in this regard I remembered about of Lakhpat Saheb Gurudwara. This Gurudwara suffered severe damage due to the devastating earth quake of in Gujarat. But, the manner in which the local people joined hands with the state Government in renovating it, is an example even today. The Government of India has taken a significant decision of building Kartarpur corridor so that our countrymen could easily visit Kartarpur in Pakistan to pay homage to Guru Nanak Dev Ji at that holy sight. My dear countrymen, we shall meet once again in the next episode after this th episode of Mann Ki Baat and I am sure that in this episode of Mann Ki Baat today I got an opportunity for the first time to talk to you about the spirit behind this programme because of your questions. But our journey shall continue. The more you connect with us, our journey will gain greater depth, providing, satisfaction to one and all. At times a question arises in the minds of people’s as to what I achieved through Mann Ki Baat. I would like to say today that of the feedback of this programme, one of the points that touches my heart most- is when people tell me that when we sit with all our family members to listen to Mann Ki Baat, we feel that the head of our family is sitting with us and sharing his ideas with us. When I heard this comment in a larger circle, I felt satisfied to know that I am yours, I am one amongst you, I am with you, you elevated me and in a way, and in this way I will continue to remain connected with you as a family member through Man Ki Baat. Your joys and sorrows are my joys and sorrows too; your expectations are my expectations also; your ambitions are my ambitions. Come on, let us take this journey further. Many many thanks. My dear countrymen, Namaskar. The st of October is the birth anniversary of our beloved Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. This year too, the youth of the country is all set, to take part in the Run for Unity’. The weather too these days is pleasant. I urge you to participate in the largest possible numbers in this run for unity. Six months or so before Independence, on the th of January, , the world famous international Magazine Time’ had a photograph of Sardar Patel on the cover page of that edition. In their lead story, they had depicted a map of India; it was nowhere close to what the map looks like now. It was the map of an India that was divided into myriad fragments. There existed over princely states. The English had lost interest in India; they wanted to leave India fragmented into pieces. Time Magazine had opined that hovering over India then were the dangers of problems like partition, violence, food scarcity, price rise and power-politics. The magazine further observed that amidst that plethora of problems, if there was anyone who possessed the capability to unite the country and heal wounds, it was Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. The story also brings to the fore other aspects of the life of the Iron Man of India the manner in which he had managed relief operations during the Ahmedabad floods in the s; the way he steered the Bardoli Satyagrah. Such was his sense of honesty commitment that the farmer, the worker right up to the industrialist trusted him with full faith. Gandhiji considered Sardar Patel as the only one capable of finding a lasting solution to the vexed issue of the states and asked him to act. Sardar Patel formulated solutions one by one, weaving the warp weft of unity on the axis of a single thread. He ensured the merger of all princely states with the Dominion of India. Whether Junagadh, Hyderabad, Travancore, or for that matter the princely states of Rajasthan, if we are able to see a United India now, it was entirely on account of the sagacity strategic wisdom of Sardar Patel. It is but natural for us to solemnly remember Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel as we exalt the spirit of unity that binds our Nation, our Mother India. The st of October this year will be special on one more account- on this day, we shall dedicate the statue of unity of the nation as a true tribute to Sardar Patel. Erected on the banks of river Narmada in Gujarat, the structure is twice the height of the Statue of Liberty. This is the world’s tallest scyscraping statue. Every Indian will now be proud to see the world’s tallest statue here on Indian soil. Sardar Patel, a true son of the soil will adorn our skies too. I hope every Indian being will swell with pride on this remarkable feat of mother India and will sing paeans of glory in its praise with the head held high. Of course, the inner wish to visit the statue of unity will come naturally to every Indian. I am sure this will turn out to be a described destination for one all across the country. My dear brothers sisters, we celebrated Infantry Day’ yesterday. I respectfully bow before all of them who are part of the Indian Armed Forces. I also salute the families of our soldiers. But, do you know why we Indian citizens commemorate this day as Infantry Day This is the very day when Indian Forces landed in Kashmir and saved the valley from the clutches of aggression. This incident too is directly related to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. I was reading an old interview with the celebrated Army officer sam Manekshaw. In that interview, field Marshal Sam Manekshaw was reminiscing on times when he was a Colonel. Around this time, military operations commenced in Kashmir. Field Marshal Manekshaw has mentioned how in a meeting, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was irked on the delay in sending troops to Kashmir During the proceedings, Sardar Patel gave him a characteristic glance and reiterated that there should be no delay in our Army operation and that a solution should be sought swiftly. And immediately after that, our troops flew to Kashmir we’ve seen how our Army was successful. The st of October also is the death anniversary of our former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Our respectful tributes to Indira ji too. My dear countrymen, who doesn’t love sports Elements like spirit, strength, skill, stamina are extremely important in the world of sports. They are the ultimate test for a sportsperson’s mettle all four of these virtues form the core foundation of nation building universally. If the youth of a country possess these qualities, that country will progress not only in areas such as Economy and Science Technology but also bring laurels home in the field of sports. Just recently I had two memorable meetings. First, I got an opportunity to meet our Para Athletes who participated in the Asian Para Games held at Jakarta. These athletes bagged a tally of medals, creating a new, unprecedented record, bringing glory to the nation. I was fortunate to get an opportunity to meet all these talented athletes personally. I congratulated them. Their grit determination; their resolve to overcome all odds in the path of success is indeed inspiring for all our countrymen. Similarly, I was blessed with a chance to meet our winners of the Summer youth Olympics held in Argentina. You will be pleased to know that in the Summer Youth Olympics , the performance of our youth was the best ever. At this event we won medals besides in mixed events. You may recall that even, in the recent Asian Games, India’s performance was par excellence. Have you observed the way I have frequently used terms such as the best ever’ or new, unprecedented record’ This is the real story of Indian Sports which are witnessing an upswing with each passing day. India is setting new records not just in the field of sports but also in hitherto uncharted areas. To give you an example, I would like to mention about Para Athlete Narayan Thakur, who won a gold medal for the country in the Para Asian Games. He is a Divyang by birth. When he turned eight he lost his father. Then he spent another eight years in an orphanage. After leaving the orphanage, he eked out a living cleaning DTC buses and working as waiter at roadside eateries. The same Narayan is winning medals for India at International events. Not just that, just observe the rapidly enhancing levels of excellence in Indian sports ! Hitherto, India had never won a medal in a Judo event, at the junior or senior level. But Tabaabi Devi created history by bagging the silver medal at the youth Olympics. year old player Tabaabi Devi hails from a village in Manipur. Her father is a labourer and mother a fish-seller. There were times when the family had no money to buy food. Even such hardships were not able to cow down her zest devotion. And she has created history by winning a medal for the country. Stories like these are innumerable. Every life, every being is a source of inspiration. Every young sportsperson’s passion dedication is the hallmark of New India. My dear countrymen, you may recall that we had successfully organized FIFA Under- World Cup in the year . The whole world acclaimed this as a very successful tournament. FIFA Under - World Cup had created a record in terms of the number of viewers on the ground. More than lakh enthusiasts enjoyed the romance of Football matches in various stadia across the country and boosted the morale of the young players. This year also, we have been fortunate to be the hosts of the Men’s Hockey World Cup in Bhubaneshwar. The Hockey World Cup will commence on the th November to be concluded on the th December. Each Indian who plays any game or has interest in any game has a definite interest in Hockey. India has a golden history in Hockey. India has won gold medals in various tournaments and has been the World Champion once. India has produced many great hockey players. Whenever there will be reference to Hockey,the story will remain incomplete without a mention of these legends. Hockey maestro Major Dhyan Chand is a renowned name all over the world. Then, from Balbeer Singh Senior, Leslie Claudius, Mohammad Shahid, Udham Singh to Dhan Raj Pillai, Indian Hockey has had a very long journey. Even today, players of Team India are encouraging the younger generation through their hard work and focused attention. It is a good chance for the sport lovers to witness closely contested matches. Go to Bhubaneshwar and cheer up the Indian team and also encourage each team there. Odisha has a dignified historical background and has a very rich cultural tradition. People of the state are full of warmth. This is a chance for the sports lovers to see Odisha. They can visit the world famous holy places like the Sun Temple of Konark, Lord Jagannath Temple in Puri and Chilka Lake along with enjoying the games there. I convey my best wishes to our Men’s Hockey Team for this tournament and assure them that crore Indians are supporting them. I also convey my wishes to all the teams from around the world coming to participate in the tournament. My dear countrymen, the way people are coming forward and volunteering for social works is really inspirational and encouraging for all our countrymen. “Service is Supreme” has been India’s tradition since centuries and we can feel the scent of this tradition in each and every sector today as well. But, in this new era, the new generation is coming forward in a new way with a fresh vigour and spirit to fulfill their new dream. Recently, I attended a programme where a portal was launched, its name is Self Society’, MyGov and the IT and Electronics industry of the country have launched this portal with a view to motivating their employees for social activities and providing them with opportunities to perform in this field. Their dedication and vigour can make each Indian feel proud. A fresh and pleasant air of IT to society, We-not I, a transformation from the individual to the community is imbibed in this. Someone is teaching the old people; someone is involved in the campaign of cleanliness whereas someone is helping out the farmers. And there is no vested interest behind all these activities but a pure feeling of dedication and resolve is the driving force. One young person learned to play wheelchair basket ball in order to be able to help the wheelchair basket ball team of differently abled, divyang players. This spirit, this dedication is a mission mode activity. Will this not make every Indian feel proud. This spirit of We, not I’ will surely inspire all of us. My dear brothers and sisters, when I was going through your suggestion for Mann Ki Baat this time, I found a very interesting comment from Shri Manish Mahapatra from Pudducherry. He wrote on Mygov- Please take up the topic “in Mann Ki Baat” as to how the tribes and their traditions and rituals are the best examples of coexistence with the nature. How do we need to adopt their traditions in our lives for achieving sustainable development and learn from those traditions Manishji, I appreciate you for bringing this subject among the listeners of Mann Ki Baat. This is one subject that inspires us to look into our dignified past and our ancient traditions, Today, the whole world and specially the western countries are discussing about environment protection and are trying to find new ways to adopt a balanced life style. Our country is also facing this problem. But, for its solution we only have to look inwards, to look into our glorious past and our rich traditions and have especially to understand the lifestyle of our tribal communities. To live in consonance and closed coordination with the nature has been an integral part of our tribal communities. Our tribal brethren worship trees and plants and flowers like gods and goddesses. The Bhil tribes of Central India and specially those in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh worship Peepal and Arjun trees religiously. The Bishnoi community in the desert land of Rajasthan has shown us a way of environment protection. Specially, in the context of serving trees, they prefer laying down their lives but cannot tolerate any harm to a single tree. Mishmi tribes of Arunachal Pradesh claim their relationship with tigers. They even treat them like their brothers and sisters. In Nagaland as well, tigers are seen as the forest guardians. People of Warli Community in Maharashtra consider tigers as their guests and for them the presence of tigers is a good omen indicating prosperity. There is a belief among the Kol community in Central India that their fortune is directly connected with the tigers and they firmly believe that if the tigers do not get food, the villagers will have to face hunger . The Gond tribes in Central Indai stop fishing in some parts of Kaithan river during the breeding season. They consider this area as a fish reserve and they get plentiful of healthy fishes because of this belief of theirs. Tribal communities make their dwelling units from natural material which are strong as well as eco-friendly. In the isolated regions of the Nilgiri plateau in South India, a small wanderer community Toda make their settlements using locally available material only. My dear brothers and sisters, this is a fact that the tribal community believes in very peaceful and harmonious co-existence but, if somebody tries to harm and cause damage to their natural resources, they do not shy away from fighting for their rights. There is no wonder that our foremost freedom fighters were the brave people from our tribal communities. Who can forget Bhagwan Birsa Munda who struggled hard against the British Empire to save their own forest land. Besides whatever I have said, there is a very long list of examples of the tribal communities which teach us how to keep a close coordination and make adjustments with the nature and the nation is indebted to our tribal people for the forest land that is still remaining with us. Come on, let us express our gratitude towards them. My dear countrymen, in “Mann Ki Baat”, we talk about those persons and institutions who make extra-ordinary contribution for the society. These works may seem small but have a very deep impact in changing our thinking and in giving a new direction to the society. A few days ago, I was reading about a farmer brother Gurbachan Singh from Punjab. The son of this hard working farmer Gurbachan Singh ji was to be married. Gurbachan Singh ji had told the bride’s parents that the marriage would be performed in a solemn manner. There is absolutely no need to spend much on wedding reception or any other item. We have to keep it a very very simple event. But then he suddenly said that he had one condition. And, when a condition is put these days, generally it is thought that the other side is going to make a big demand which will be really difficult for the bride’s family to fulfill. But, you will be surprised to know that Bhai Gurbachan Singh was a simple farmer and what he told the bride’s father and the condition he placed reflects the true strength of our society. Gurbachan Singh ji asked him to promise that they will not burn parali or stubble in their fields. You can well imagine the social strength this statement had. This point made by Gurbachan Singh ji appears quite ordinary but this reveals how tall and strong his personality is and we have seen that there are many families in our society who connect their individual matters with the benefit of the society as a whole. Shriman Gurbachan Singh ji’s family has presented one such example before us. I have also read about a village Kallar Majra which is near Nabha in Punjab. Kallar Majra came into lime light as the farmers there mix the stubble with the sand by ploughing their fields rather than burning the stubble and adopt the necessary technology for the process. Congratulations to bhai Gurbachan Singh ji ! Congratulations to the people of Kallar Majra and of all those places who are making their best efforts to keep the environment clean and pollution free. All of you are carrying forward the Indian tradition of a healthy life style as a true successor. Just as a sea is formed by collection of tiny drops, similarly,a small constructive step, plays a vital role in creating a positive environment. My dear countrymen, it has been told in our epics:- : , , : : : It means- O, Lord, peace should prevail all around in all three “Lokas”,in water, in air, in space, in fire, in wind, in medicines, in vegetation, in gardens, in sub conscious, in the whole creation. Grant peace to each soul, each heart, in me, in you, in every particle and everywhere in the Universe. Om Shanti: Shanti: Shanti:. Wherever there will be a talk of world peace, India’s name and contribution will be written in golden letters. For India, th of November this year has a special significance because on th November a hundred years back the World War I had ended. Ending of that war is completing one hundred years meaning thereby that a century of ending of the vast devastation and human loss would also get completed. For India, World War I was an important event. Rightly speaking we had no direct connection with that war. Despite this, our soldiers fought bravely and played a very big role and made the supreme sacrifice. Indian soldiers showed it to the world that they are second to none if it comes to war. Our soldiers have displayed great valour in difficult areas and adverse conditions. There has just been a single objective behind it- Restoration of peace. The world witnessed a dance of death and devastation during the World War I; According to estimates, around one crore soldiers and almost the same number of civilians lost their lives. This made the whole world realize and understand the importance of peace. The definition of peace has changed in the last hundred years. Today, peace does not only mean no war’. There is a need to work unitedly to address issues such as terrorism, climate change, economic development to social justice through universal cooperation and co-ordination. Development of the poorest of the poor is the real indicator of peace. My dear countrymen, our North-East has a unique distinction of its own. The natural beauty of North East has no parallel and the people of this area are extremely talented. Now our North-east is also known for all best deeds. North east is one region that has made grand progress in organic farming. A few days ago Sikkim won the prestigious Future Policy Gold Award, for encouraging the sustainable food system. This award is given by the UN body Food Agriculture Organisation’ FAO. You will be delighted to know that this best policy making award is equivalent to an Oscar in the sector. Not only this, our Sikkim outperformed nominated policies of countries to win this award. For this, I heartily compliment the people of Sikkim. My dear countrymen, October is about to end. Quite a change is being felt in the weather. Winter has set in and with the changing weather, the season of festivals has also set in - Dhanteras, Deepawali, Bhaiya Dooj, Chhatth in a way it can be said that the month of November is the month of festivals. I extend my best wishes to all countrymen for these festivals. I would request all of you to take best care of yourselves and take care of your health as well and also take care of social interests. I am sure these festivals are an opportunity to make new resolves. These festivals prove a chance to advance in a mission mode and to make firm resolves in your life. Your progress is a vital part of the country’s progress. The more you progress, the more will the country progress. My best wishes to you all. Thank you very very much. My dear countrymen, Namaskar. There must be hardly any Indian who doesn’t feel proud of our Armed Forces, our army jawans, our soldiers. Every Indian, irrespective of region, caste, religion, sect or language, is ever eager to express joy and show solidarity with our soldiers. Yesterday, one hundred and twenty-five crore Indians celebrated the Paraakram Parva, the festival of Valour. We remembered that surgical strike carried out in , where our soldiers gave a befitting reply to the audacity of a proxy war under the garb of terrorism. At various places in the country, exhibitions have been organised by our Armed Forces in order to apprise the maximum number of citizens, especially the younger generation, of the might we possess; how capable we are and how our soldiers risk their lives to protect us citizens. A day such as Paraakaram Prava reminds our youth of the glorious heritage of our Army. It also inspires us to maintain the unity integrity of the country. I too participated in a programme held at Jodhpur in the land of the valiant, Rajasthan. It has now been decided that our soldiers will give a befitting reply to whosoever makes an attempt to destroy the atmosphere of peace and progress in our Nation. We staunchly believe in peace; we are committed to taking it forward but NOT at the cost of compromising our self-respect and sovereignty of our Nation. India has always been resolutely committed to peace. In the two world-wars fought in the th century, over a lakh of our soldiers made the Supreme Sacrifice; that too in a war where we were not involved in any way. We have never eyed someone else’s territory maliciously. This in itself was our commitment dedication towards peace. A few days ago, on the rd of September, on the occasion of the centenary of the Battle of Haifa in Israel, we remembered paid tributes to our brave soldiers of Mysore, Hyderabad Jodhpur Lancers who had freed Haifa from the clutches of oppressors. This too was an act of valour on part of our soldiers on the path to peace. Even today, India is one of the largest contributors to various United Nations Peace Keeping Forces in terms of sending forces personnel. For decades, our brave soldiers wearing blue helmets have played a stellar role in ensuring maintenance of World Peace. My dear countrymen, the sky offers the rarest of hues. It is not at all surprising that the Indian Air Force has proved itself to be the cynosure of every citizen’s eye, through the display of sheer might in the skies. It has bestowed upon us a sense of security. One of the notable features eagerly awaited by spectators during the Republic Day Parade is the Flypast comprising the magnificent display of the might of our Air Force through their breath taking aerobatic manoeuvres. We celebrate Air Force Day on the th of October. Making a humble beginning in with six pilots and Airmen, our Air Force has emerged as one of mightiest and the bravest Air Force of the st century today. From the core of my heart, I congratulate those Air Warriors and their families who rendered service to the nation. In , when Pakistani attackers resorted to an unprecedented attack, it was indeed our Air Force which ensured that Indian Soldiers and armaments reached the battlefield promptly. The Air Force also retaliated befittingly in too. Who does not know about the Bangladesh Freedom Struggle of The Air Force played a very significant role in by pushing back the intruders and liberating Kargil from their clutches. The Air Force defeated the enemy at Tiger Hill by carrying out air sorties on their positions round the clock. Be it the relief and rescue work or disaster management, our country is indebted to our Air Force for the commendable efforts of our Air Warrior. They have always displayed a unique spirit in times of natural calamities like storms, cyclones, floods and forest fires to extend full assistance to our countrymen. The Air Force has set an example in ensuring gender equality and has opened its doors for our daughters of India. Now, the Air Force is offering the option of Permanent Commission to Women besides the Short Service Commission, which I had announced on the th of August this year from the Red Fort. Indian can proudly claim that in the armed forces, our Army not only man-power but woman-power too is contributing equally. Women are already empowered and now getting armed too. My dear countrymen, a few days ago, Officer Abhilash Tomy of our Navy was struggling between life and death. The whole country was concerned about saving Tomy. You know, Abhilash Tomy is a very courageous, brave soldier. He was the first Indian who set on a global voyage in a small boat without any modern technology. For the last days, he was moving ahead in South Indian Ocean to participate in the Golden Globe Race maintaining his speed but suddenly a severe cyclonic storm landed him in trouble. Yet, this brave heart from the Navy kept struggling for many days in mid-ocean. He fought to be afloat without food or drink. He did not accept defeat and continued to fight death. A rare example of courage, determination, strength and bravery a few days ago I talked to Abhilash over the telephone after he was rescued and brought safely ground. I had met Tomy earlier too Despite having faced such a tough situation; his grit spirit, his determination to make another similar attempt is an inspiration for our younger generation. I pray for Tomy’s sound health and I am sure that his courage, bravery and resolve to fight and emerge a winner will inspire our younger generation. My dear countrymen, every child in our country knows the importance of the nd of October for our nation. The nd of October, this year, has a special significance. For two years from now on, we are going to organise various programmes throughout the world on the th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. Mahatma Gandhi’s philosophy has inspired the whole world. Everyone including great personalities like Dr. Martin Luther King and Nelson Mandela derived strength from Gandhiji’s ideology to be able to fight a long battle to ensure right of equality and dignity for the people. In today’s Mann Ki Baat, I want to talk about another important work of revered Bapu which maximum countrymen should know. In , Mahatma Gandhi started penning down a few thoughts in the shape of a constructive Programme. Later, in , when the Freedom Struggle gained momentum, he prepared an amended copy of those ideas. Revered Bapu, put forth his ideas on various subjects like Farmers, villages, securing of labour rights, cleanliness and promoting of education. This is also known as the Gandhi Charter. Revered Babu was a people’s person. Getting connected with people or connecting people with him was Bapu’s special quality, this was in his nature. Everyone has experienced this as a most unique part of his personality. He made everyone feel that he or she was very important and absolutely necessary for the country. His biggest contribution in the Freedom struggle was that he made it an expansive “Jan-Aandolan” People’s Movement. During the Freedom Struggle people from all sections and all regions dedicated themselves at Mahatma Gandhi’s call. Bapu gave an inspirational mantra to all of us which is known as Gandhiji’s Talisman. In that, Gandhiji had said, “I give you one mantra, whenever you are in doubt or whenever your ego gets over your personality, undergo this test; remember the face of the poorest or the weakest person that you have seen, recall his looks and ask your inner self how useful your intended step would be for that person. Will this, in anyway, benefit him! Will he be able to get some control over his life and destiny through your step ! Meaning thereby that will your step help millions of those people in getting Swaraj who have an empty stomach and a dissatisfied soul! Then, you will see that your doubt is waning away and your ego is also getting quelled. My dear countrymen, one of Gandhiji’s mantras is very relevant event today. The swelling middle class of the country, its increasing economic power, increasing purchasing power; can we remember revered Bapu for a moment while going out for shopping! Can we remember that mantra of Bapu!” Can we spare a thought while purchasing anything as to who in my country will be benefitted by this purchase! Whose face will sport a smile! Who will be the fortunate one to get a direct or indirect benefit from your purchase! I will feel much happier if my purchase will benefit the poorest of the poor. Keeping this mantra of Gandhiji in mind while making any purchases during the th Anniversary of Gandhiji, we must make it a point to see that our purchase must benefit one of our countrymen and in that too, one who has put in physical labour, who has invested money, who has applied skill must get some benefit. This is the mantra of Gandhiji, this is the message of Gandhiji and I firmly believe that a small step of yours can surely bring about a very big benefit in the life of the poorest and the most underprivileged person. My dear countrymen, when Gandhiji said that by maintaining cleanliness, freedom will be won then he probably was not aware how this would happen. But this did happen and India got freedom. In the same way today we may feel that even by making a tiny contribution I may be contributing in a big way to help in the economic upliftment and economic empowerment of my country and help fight a battle against poverty by lending strength to the poor. I feel that this is true patriotism, and a perfect tribute to revered Bapu’s work. For example, think of purchasing Khadi and handloom products on special occasions; this will benefit many weavers. It is said that Lal Bahadur Shastriji used to preserve old and worn out Khadi clothes because some one’s labour could be felt in the making of those clothes. He used to say that all these Khadi clothes have been woven after putting in a hard labour, every thread of these clothes must be utilized. This spirit of attachment towards the country and fellow countrymen was deeply imbibed in that great person of a very short physical stature. Two days later, we shall celebrate the birth anniversary of Shastriji along with respected Bapu’s birth anniversary. The very name of Shastriji evokes a feeling of eternal faith in the hearts of us, Indians. His mild persona always fills every Indian with a sense of pride. Lal Bahadur Shastriji had a unique quality in that, he was very humble outwardly but he was rock solid from inside. His slogan “Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan” is the hall mark of his grand personality. It was the result of his selfless service to the nation that in a brief tenure of about one and a half years he gave to our jawans and farmers the mantra to reach the pinnacle of success. My dear countrymen, while remembering revered Bapu today, it is quite natural not to skip talking of cleanliness. A movement “Swachhta Hi Sewa” was launched on the th of September. Crores of people got connected with this movement and luckily I also got a chance to participate in the voluntary cleanliness shramdaan with the children of Delhi’s Ambedkar School. I went to the school, the foundation of which had been laid by none other than respected Baba Saheb himself. On the th of September, people from all sections across the country connected themselves to this voluntary cleaning movement. Institutions also extended their contribution enthusiastically. School children, college students, NCC, NSS, youth organisations, media groups, the corporate world, all of them offered voluntary cleanliness service on a large scale. I heartily congratulate all these cleanliness-loving countrymen for their efforts. Come on, let us listen to a phone call. Many many thanks, you’ve made a significant remark that cleanliness has a specific meaning in every one’s life and what could be a matter of immense joy for all of us than the fact that a toilet has been built in your house under the “Swachh Bharat Abhiyan” and that, all of you have the facility now. And possibly those connected with this movement may not be able to guess that you cannot see because of your visual challenge. But one understands the difficulties you were facing when there was no toilet and that the construction of this toilet has really proved to be a big boon for you. If you had not made a call about this aspect, perhaps those connected with this cleanliness movement might have also not thought about such a sensitive issue. I specially thank you for your phone call. My dear countrymen, Swachh Bharat Mission or Clean India Mission has become a success story not only in our country but in the whole world and everyone is talking about this movement. This time India is hosting the biggest Sanitation Convention of the world so far, the Mahatma Gandhi International Sanitation Convention. Sanitation Ministers from countries across the world and experts on the subject of sanitation will converge and share their experiments and experiences. Mahatma Gandhi International Sanitation Convention will conclude on nd October, with the commencement of Bapu’s th Birth Anniversary celebrations. My dear countrymen, there is a Sanskrit quote- U;k;ewya LojkT;a L;kr Nyayamoolam Swarajyam Syat meaning justice lies at the root of swaraj and while discussing the subject of justice, the spirit of human rights is inherent in that. This is specially essential for the freedom and peace of the exploited, victimised and deprived people and to ensure justice for them. In the Constitution drafted by Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar, many provisions were inserted to protect the fundamental rights of the poor. Inspired by his vision, the 'National Human Rights Commission' NHRC was formed on th October . A few days later NHRC would complete years of its existence.The NHRC has not only protected human rights but has also promoted respect for human dignity over the years. Our most beloved leader, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the former Prime Minister of our country, had clearly said that human rights are not analien concept for us. In the emblem of our National Human Rights Commission, the ideal mantra harking back to Vedic period- "Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah" is inscribed. NHRC has instilled widespread awareness of human rights and has played an important role in preventing their misuse. In its journey of years, it has created an atmosphere of hope and confidence in the countrymen. For a healthy society, and for lofty democratic values I feel that, it is a very hope inspiring event. Today, with NHRC operating at the national level, State Human Rights Commissions have also been constituted. As a society, we need to understand the importance of human rights and inculcate them into practice - this is the very basis of Sab ka SaathSab ka Vikas'. My dear countrymen, the month of October heralds, Jai Prakash Narayan ji's birth anniversary, the beginning of the birth centenary of Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindiaji. These luminaries have been infusing inspiration in all of us and we offer our heartfelt tributes to them. October happens to be the birth anniversary of Sardar sahib, I shall dwell upon his birth anniversary in detail in the next episode of Mann Ki Baat but today I want to mention that for the past few years, the occasion of Sardar Sahib’s birth anniversary on October is marked in every small town and district by organizing the 'Run for Unity' race. Even this year, we should try to organize 'Run for Unity' in our village, town, city or metropolis. This is the best way to remember Sardar Saheb, because he worked for the unity of our nation throughout his lifetime. I urge you all that on October , through 'Run for Unity', to strengthen our efforts and bind every section of the society as a unified unit. This will be a great tribute to Sardar Sahib. My dear countrymen, be it Navratri, Durgapuja or Vijayadashmi, I offer all my heartfelt greetings to all of you on account of these holy festivals. Thank you My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today, the entire country is celebrating Rakshabandhan. Heartiest greetings to all fellow citizens on this auspicious occasion. The festival of Rakshabandhan symbolizes the bond of love trust between a brother a sister. For centuries, this festival has proved to be a shining example of social harmony. In the nation’s history, there are innumerable accounts of this sacred thread, binding together people of distant lands, different religions, around a spindle of trust. In a few days from now, we shall celebrate the festive occasion of Janmashtami. The whole atmosphere will reverberate to the sonorous chants calls of Hathi, Ghoda, Palki’, Jai Kanhaiya Lal ki’ and Govinda-Govinda’. It is indeed an extremely joyous experience to imbue the essence of Bhagwan Krishna revel blissfully. In other parts of the country, especially Maharashtra, our young friends must be busy with preparations of the Dahi-Handi’. the festive ritual of the human pyramid breaking the curd filled earthen pot. Heartiest greetings to all countrymen on the festive occasions of Rakshabandhan and Janmashtami. Bhagini Chinmayee, Sister Chinmayee has asked a question in Sanskrit. Excellent, extraordinary. My salutations to you. On the occasion of Sanskrit week, I extend my best wishes to all countrymen. I am extremely thankful to young Chinmayee for touching upon this subject. Friends, apart from Rakshabandhan, Shravan Poornima is also celebrated as Sanskrit Day. I congratulate all those actively involved in preserving conserving this glorious heritage, helping it to reach out to the masses. Every language has its own significance, sanctity. India takes great pride in the fact that Tamil is the most ancient of world languages. We Indians also feel proud that from Vedic times to the modern day, Sanskrit language has played a stellar role in the universal spread of knowledge. Sanskrit language literature encompasses a storehouse of knowledge pertaining to every facet of life. Science technology, agriculture health, Mathematics Management, economy environment, the entire spectrum has been touched upon. It is said that our Vedas have detailed reference on Mantras, on ways means to counter the challenges of global warming. You will be pleased to know that even today, residents of village Mattur in Shivamoga district of Karnataka use Sanskrit as their lingua franca. You will be astonished to know that Sanskrit is a language that possesses the capacity for infinite word formation with two thousand verb roots, suffixes prefixes; coupled with compounds, the possibility of word-creation is limitless. And that is why the minutest nuance of an expression or subject can be accurately described. This has been the core speciality of Sanskrit. Today, at times, in order to communicate more assertively, we tend to make use of English Quotations or even sher-o-shayari-urdu poetry. But those who are well acquainted with Sanskrit Subhashitas epigrammatic verses, know very well that it is possible to make a crisp, precise statement, using very few words through the usage of subhashitas. And since there is a sense of geographical cultural belonging, they are easy to understand assimilate. For example, in order to illustrate the significance of the Guru in one’s life, it has been said : r - , u.kh Hkosr Thereby meaning, when a guru imparts even an iota of knowledge to the student, there is no material or wealth on the entire earth that the student can make use of, to repay the guru. We must abide by the same essence, the same spirit as we celebrate Teachers’ Day. Knowledge the guru are incomparable, invaluable, priceless, On the occasion of Teachers’ Day, we remember the great philosopher, former President of India Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan ji. His birth anniversary is celebrated as Teacher’ Day across the country. I felicitate all the teachers in the country on this occasion. I also salute your sense of commitment towards science, education and students. My dear countrymen, the monsoon comes along, bringing a new ray of hope to our toiling farmers. It provided much needed succor to the scorched trees shrubs, and to parched water bodies; on the other hand excessive rainfall causes devastating floods. It’s a vagary of Nature that some places have received higher rainfall compared to other places. We just saw how the terrible floods in Kerala have affected human lives. In today’s pressing, hard times, the entire Nation is with Kerala. Our sympathies are with those families who lost their loved ones. Loss of lives cannot be compensated, but I assure the grief-stricken families that in this moment of suffering misery, a hundred twenty five crore Indians stand by them, shoulder to shoulder. I earnestly pray for those injured in this natural disaster to get well soon. I firmly believe that the sheer grit and courage of the people of the state will see Kerala rise again. Disasters, unfortunately leave behind a trail of destruction. But one gets to witness facets of humanity, humaneness during disasters. From Kutch to Kamrup, from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, everyone is endeavoring to contribute in some way or the other so that wherever a disaster strikes, be it Kerala or any other part of India, human life returns to normalcy. Irrespective of age group or area of work, people are contributing. Everyone is trying to ensure speedy mitigation of the sufferings people in Kerala are going through, in fact sharing their pain. We know that jawans of our armed forces are the vanguards of rescue relief operations in Kerala. They have left no stone unturned as saviors of those trapped in the floods. The Air Force, Navy, Army, BSF, CISF, RAF, every agency has played an exemplary role in the rescue relief operations. I would like to specially mention the arduous endeavors of the NDRF daredevils. At this moment of hardship agony, their service stands out as a shining example. The capability, commitment controlling situation through rapid decisions of the NDRF have made them a cynosure of every Indian’s eye, worthy of respect admiration. Yesterday was the festival of Onam. We pray for Onam to provide strength to the country, especially Kerala so that it returns to normalcy on a newer journey of development. Once again on behalf of all Indians, I would like to re assure each everyone in Kerala and other affected places that at this moment of calamity, the entire country stands by them. My dear countrymen ! I was looking into the suggestions received for “Mann Ki Baat”. The subject about which most of the people from across the country have written is “Our revered Atal Behari Vajpayee”. Kirti from Ghaziabad, Swati Vats from Sonepat, brother Praveen from Kerala, Dr. Swapan Banerjee from West Bengal, Akhilesh Pandey from Katihar, Bihar and numerous others have written on Narendra Modi Mobile App and MyGov asking me to speak on various aspects of Atalji’s life. As soon as the people in our country and abroad heard of the demise of Atalji on th August, everyone drowned in sadness. He was a leader who gave up his position as Prime Minister fourteen years ago. In a way, he was cut-off from active politics for the last years. He was neither seen in the news nor in public life. Ten years is a huge gap but on th August our country and the whole world witnessed that there was not a gap of even a single moment in the common man’s heart. The wave of love and faith that spread across the nation is an indicator of his great personality. During these last days, many great aspects of Atalji came up to the fore. People remembered him as the best member of Parliament, sensitive writer, best orator and most popular Prime Minister and will continue to remember him. The country will ever remain grateful to Atalji for bringing good governance in the main stream. But, I just want to touch upon one more facet of Atalji’s legendary personality and that is the political culture which Atalji gave to India, his efforts in the direction of bringing about the changes in our political culture, his efforts to mould it into an organized framework and which proved very beneficial for India and a bigger benefit will accrue in days to come. This is certain. India will remain ever grateful to Atalji for bringing the st Amendment Act, . This change brought about two important changes in India’s politics. First one is that the size of the cabinet in states was restricted to of the total seats in the state Assembly. And the second one is that the limit under the Anti Defection Law was enhanced from one-thirds to two-thirds. Besides, clear guidelines were defined to disqualify the defector. For many years in India, the political culture of forming a very large cabinet was being misused to constitute jumbo cabinets not only to create a divide but also to appease political leaders. Atalji changed it. This effort of his resulted in saving of money as well as of resources. This also helped in improving efficiency. It could only be a visionary like Atalji who brought in this transformation and as a result of this, healthy traditions blossomed in our polity. Atalji was a true patriot. It was during his tenure that the timing of presenting the budget was changed. Earlier, as was the British tradition, the Budget used to be presented at pm because in London, Parliament used to start working at that time. In the year , Atalji changed the time of presenting the budget from pm to am. One more freedom- the Indian Flag Code was framed in Atalji’s tenure and it came into effect in . A number of such rules have been included in this code which made it possible to unfurl the tricolor in public places. This provided a chance to more and more of our countrymen to unfurl our national flag. Thus, he brought our beloved tricolor closer to the common man. You must have noticed how Atalji took bold steps to bring about fundamental reforms, whether in our election process or about the shortcomings concerning the people’s representatives. Similarly, you can see that presently efforts are afoot and discussions are being held about simultaneously holding the elections for Lok Sabha and for state assemblies. The Government and the opposition both are putting forth their view points. This is a good development and a healthy sign for our democracy. I must say that developing healthy traditions for a sound democracy, making constant efforts to strengthen democracy, encouraging open-minded debates would also be a appropriate tribute to Atalji. Reiterating our resolve to fulfill his dream of a prosperous and developed India, I along with all of you pay tributes to Atalji. My dear countrymen ! whenever a discussion about Parliament is there nowadays, it is about hold-ups, noisy scenes and stalling the proceedings but when something good happens, it is not given much importance. The monsoon session of Parliament ended just a few days back. You will be glad to know that the productivity of Lok Sabha remained percent and that of Rajya Sabha was percent. All the members rose above party interests to make the Monsoon session most productive and this is why Lok Sabha passed bills and in Rajya Sabha fourteen bills were passed. This Monsoon session of Parliament will always be remembered as a session for social justice and youth welfare. A number of important bills beneficial to the youth and the backward classes were passed during this session. As you know, a demand to constitute an OBC Commission similar to SCST commission was long pending for decades. The country fulfilled its resolve this time to make an OBC Commission and also granted it Constitutional powers. This step will prove to be the one to move forward our march towards achieving the goal of social justice. An amendment bill to secure the rights of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes also were passed in this session. This Act will give more security to the interests of SC and ST communities. This will also forbid criminals from indulging in atrocities and will instill confidence among the dalit communities. No civil society can tolerate any kind of injustice towards the woman-power of the country. The nation will not tolerate those committing rapes. With this point in view Parliament has made a provision of strictest punishment by passing the Criminal Act Amendment Bill. Those guilty of rape will get a minimum sentence of ten years and those found guilty of raping girls below the age of years will be awarded the death sentence. Recently, you might have read in newspapers, that a court in Mandsaur in Madhya Pradesh, after a brief hearing of two months, pronounced the death sentence on two criminals found guilty of raping a minor girl. Earlier, a court in Katni in Madhya Pradesh awarded the death sentence to the guilty after a hearing of just five days. Courts in Rajasthan have also taken similar quick decisions. This Act will play an effective role in curbing crimes against women and girls. Economic growth will be incomplete without a social transformation. The Triple Talaq Bill has been passed by the Lok Sabha although it could not be passed in the Rajya Sabha, I assure the Muslim women that the whole country stands by them to provide them social justice. When we move ahead in the national interest, a change in the lives of the poor, the backward, the exploited and the deprived ones can also be brought about. In the Monsoon session, this time, everyone jointly presented an ideal approach. Today, I publicly express my heartfelt gratitude to all MP’s. My dear countrymen! The attention of crores of Indians is focused on the Asian Games being held in Jakarta. Every morning, first of all, people look for newspapers, Television, News and Social Media to check Indian players winning medals. The Asian Games are going on. I wish to congratulate all players who have won medals for the country. I extend my best wishes to those players who are yet to compete. Indian players are performing exceedingly well in shooting and wrestling but our players are winning medals in those competitions too, in which our performance has not been so good earlier-like WUSHU and ROWING. These are not just medals but an evidence of the sky high spirits of the Indian players. Among those winning medals for our country are a large number of our daughters which is a very positive sign; so much so, that youngsters of only - years of age have brought honour to our country by winning medals. This too is a very positive indication that most of the medal-winners hail from small towns and villages and these players have achieved this success by putting in sheer hard work. We shall celebrate National Sports Day on th August and I extend my best wishes to all sport lovers and also pay my tributes to the legendary hockey wizard Shri Dhyanchandji. I request every citizen to make it a point to play and take care of their fitness because only a healthy India will build a developed and prosperous India. When India will be fit, only then India’s future will be bright. Once again, I congratulate the medal winners at the Asian Games and also wish the remaining players perform well. Many good wishes to you all on the National Sports Day. Namaste Bhawnaji, I respect your sentiments. All of us have seen houses and buildings being constructed of bricks and stones but can you imagine that about twelve hundred years ago, a giant mountain which was a single stone mountain was give the shape of an elegant, huge and a unique temple this may be difficult to imagine, but this happened and that temple is Kailash Nath Mandir in Ellora, Mahrashtra. Would you believe if someone tells you that about a thousand years ago, an over sixty metres tall pillar of granite was built and another granite rock weighing about tonnes was placed over its top. But, Brihdeshwar temple of Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu is the place where this unbelievable combination of Engineering and Architecture can be seen. Anybody will feel overawed on seeing Rani Ki Vaav of the th Century in Patan in Gujarat. Our land has been an engineering laboratory. There have been several engineers in India who made the unimaginable possible and presented such marvels of engineering before the world. In this lineage of great engineers, we were blessed with a diamond whose work is still a source of wonder for all. He was Bharat Ratna Dr. M. Visvesvaraya. Lakhs of farmers and common people continue to benefit from the Krishna Raj Sagar Dam built by him. He is greatly revered in that part of our country and the whole nation remembers him with great respect and regard. In his memory, th September is observed as Engineers Day. Following his footsteps, our engineers have created their own identity in the world. When I talk of wonders in the Engineering world, I am reminded of an incident of when a devastating earth quake hit Kutch in Gujarat. I used to work as a volunteer there during those days, I got a chance to go to a village and had a chance to meet a lady of more than a hundred years of age. And she was looking at me and mockingly, saying, “Look at my house. It is called Bhoonga in Kutch. This house has faced three earthquakes. I myself have seen three in this house itself. But, you did not find any damage anywhere. These houses were built by our ancestors in sync with nature and surroundings of this place”. And she was saying all this with such a feeling of pride that it made me think that engineers in that era had constructed such structures according to the local situations which kept the common man safe and secured. While observing Engineers Day, we should think of the future as well. Workshops should be held at different places. What are the things we need to learn in the changing times What do we need to teach What do we need to connect to Nowadays, disaster management has assumed immense significance. The world is facing natural calamities. What then should be the new form of structural engineering What courses should be designed to that end What should be taught to the students How do we keep construction eco friendly How can we enhance the quality of construction by making value addition through local materials How do we make zero waste our priority All such points need to be pondered upon when we observe Engineers Day. My dear countrymen! There is a mood of festivity and with this the preparations for Diwali also begin. We will keep meeting through Mann Ki Baat, and will keep sharing matters close to our hearts. We will join hands in taking our country forward with heartfelt vigor. With these feelings, I extend my best wishes to you all. Thanks. We shall meet. My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Of late, News of abundant rainfall has been steadily coming in. At places, we are hearing of rising concerns on account of excessive showers; at some places, people are anxiously waiting for the rains to begin. The vastness and diversity of India, in fact, at times even rains play hide seek through partiality laced likes dislikes. But why should we blame the rains! After all it was humankind that chose the path of conflict with Nature and consequently earnt her periodic wrath. And that is why it becomes our collective responsibility Let us be lovers of nature, protectors of Nature, conservers of Nature and thus, ensure spontaneous balance in her myriad bounty. Come to think of it, recently an incident pertaining to a natural disaster attracted global attention, leaving every heart mind perturbed. All of you must have watched it on T.V in Thailand a team of teenaged football players and their coach went on an excursion to a cave. Usually it takes a few hours to enter and exit that cave. But destiny had different plans that day. Barely had they entered deep into the cave that a sudden heavy downpour caused water logging at the inlet of the cave. Their exit was completely blocked. Not able to find a way out, they perched themselves a top a mound inside the cave; not for a day or two, but an entire days. One can only imagine the predicament of these teenagers in the face of death, where every second was fraught with danger. On the one hand they were struggling against all odds; on the other, the world over, humanity joined hands in expressing the noblest the most righteous of human virtues. The world over, people prayed for the safe secure exit of these children. No stone was left unturned to trace their where abouts, their well-being and their rescue. Their timely evacuation was of a prime concern, since the heavy monsoon would have delayed rescue-attempts by a few months. Anyway, the good news of their safe exit spread a sigh of relief, a sense of inner calm. But I feel like viewing the entire sequence of events from another perspective, i.e, how the operation was conducted! The sense of responsibility commitment, prevailing at every level was astonishing. The government, their parents, family members, media, citizens of that country, each one of them displayed an awe-inspiring sense of peace and patience. All of them came together as a team to accomplish their mission. I feel the self-control exercised by each one of them in conduct is worth understanding and emulating. It is not that the parents were not aggrieved, it is not that the mothers’ eyes had ceased to be moist. Their patience, their restraint, in fact the calm composure exercised by the entire society is commendable worth following. During the operation, a sailor from Thailand Navy sacrificed his life. The whole world is be wildered at the way they held on with courage and patience, without losing hope, despite the odds against them in the water-logged dark cave. This proves that when humanity stands together, it creates wonders. What is certainly required is focusing on your goal with a calm steady demeanour and the will to strive. A few days ago, the country’s beloved poet Neeraj Ji left us forever. Neeraj ji was blessed with a special quality it was a combination of hope, faith, a firm resolve and self-confidence. Every word of Neeraj ji’s work can instill a lot of strength inspiration in us Indians. He wrote vafk;kj ydj gh jgsxk vkafk;k pkgs mBkvks fctfy;k pkgs fxjkvks ty x;k gS nhi rks vafk;kj ydj gh jgsxk The darkness shall be dispelled Whether you brew up storms Or make lightening strike Now that the lamp has been lit The darkness shall be dispelled My heartfelt respectful tributes to Neeraj ji. Usually, the months of July and August are very important for farmers and the youth. This is the time which is Peak season for colleges. Like Satyam, Hundreds of thousands of youth leave schools to join colleges. Whereas February and March get consumed in exams, papers and answers, April May are meant for enjoying vacations, followed by results and thereafter, shaping a course for one’s life through career choices. July is the month when the youth step into a new phase of life, where the focus shifts from questions and veers towards cut-offs. The attention of students steers from home to hostel. Students submit themselves to the tutelage of Professors vis a vis the shadow of their parents. I firmly believe that my young friends must be enthusiastic happy on the commencement of their college life. Leaving home for the first time, moving out of one’s village, coming out of a protective environment amounts to taking charge of the course of one’s life. This multitude of young people leave their homes for the first time to chart a new direction for their lives. Some students might have joined their respective colleges and some must be about to join. All I would like to say to you is Be calm, enjoy life, seek inner happiness in life. There is no alternative to books, one has to study, yet one’s bent of mind should be towards discovering new things. Old friends are invaluable. Childhood friends are precious, but selecting, making maintaining new friendships is a task that requires immense prudence. Keep learning something new, such as newer skills and languages. Young people who leave their homes for the sake of studies should discover their new places, know more about the people, language, culture tourism facets related to them. My best wishes to all the young people about to begin a new innings. Referring to the college season reminds me of someone I saw in the News recently how Asharam Choudhury a student from an extremely poor family in Madhya Pradesh overcame life’s many challenges to achieve success. In his maiden attempt, he cracked the Entrance exam for MBBS at AIIMS, Jodhpur. His father earns his daily bread by waste-picking. I congratulate him on his success. There are many such instances of students from deprived families who, through sheer determination perseverance overcame all odds and stood out to be beacons of inspiration to others. Examples such as Prince Kumar of Delhi, whose father is a DTC bus driver, Abhay Gupta of Kolkata who studied on foothpaths under street lights, Bitiya Afreen Sheikh of Ahmedabad, whose father drives an auto rickshaw, Nagpur’s daughter Khushi, whose father is a school bus driver, Karthik of Haryana, whose father is a watchman or Ramesh Sahu of Jharkhand, whose father is a brick-kiln labourer or Gurgaon’s divyang angel Anushka Panda, who suffers from a hereditary disorder called spinal muscular atrophy all of them overcame each every obstacle through their firm resolve and Zeal, attaining success for the world to see. If we look around, we can see many such examples. Any commendable incident from any part of the country infuses my heart with energy and inspires me. And when I mention the glorious journey of these youth, I am reminded of Neeraj ji’s line which sum up the raison d’etre of life. Neeraj ji has said xhr vkdk’k dks kjrh dk lqukuk gS eqs gj vaksjs dks mtkys esa cqykuk gS eqs Qwy dh xak ls ryokj dks lj djuk gS vkSj xkxk ds igkMksa dks txkuk gS eqs How I wish to make the sky listen to the song of the earth How I wish to inspire every strand of darkness to come to the radiance of light And I wish to conquer the might of the sword With the fragrance of flowers And to awaken the mountains with the Sweetness of songs. My dear countrymen, a few days ago I happened to glance through a news item, it said- “Two youths make Modi’s dream come true”. On reading further, I came to know how our youngsters put in efforts to transform the lives of the common man by making smart and creative use of technology. It so happened that once I was interacting with Indian youth in San Jose town of America hailed as a Technology Hub. I had appealed to those young people to think over how could they use their talent to India’s benefit and do something in that direction whenever they found time. I had made an appeal to change brain-drain into brain-gain. Two IT Professionals from Rae Bareilly Yogesh Sahu ji and Rajneesh Bajpayee ji accepted my challenge and made a unique attempt. With their joint efforts, Yogesh ji and Rajneesh ji have developed a SmartGaonApp by utilizing their professional skills. This App is not only connecting the villagers with the whole world but now they can obtain any information on their own mobile phones. Residents of the village Taudhakpur in Rae Bareilly, village chief, District Magistrate, CDO and every one joined in to create awareness amongst the masses. This App is actually bringing in a Digital Revolution in the village, with the help of this App, it has since become easier to record, track and monitor developmental work being done in the village. This App contains phone directory, News section, events list, health centre and information centre of the village. This App is very useful for the farmers and the grammar feature of the App and FACT rate among the farmers functions like a market place for their products. If you look into this incident minutely, one thing will strike you and that is the young man living in America adhering to that country’s life-style and ideology, who left India many years ago but, knows the finer details about his village, knows about the challenges and still is emotionally attached to his village. This seems to be the reason as to how he could develop this App which is most suited to needs of the village. A sense of belonging towards the village and towards one’s roots and also a spirit to show and do something is naturally there in each and every Indian. But, sometimes because of time, sometimes because of distance and at times because of situations that spirit gets faded but just with a touch of a tiny spark, everything re-emerges which takes one back to old memories. We should also check if such a thing has happened in our case too whether circumstances, situations, distances have made us alien, whether dust has gathered over our determinations. Do think. Santoshji, many - many thanks for your phone call. Actually, Pandharpur Wari is an amazing journey in itself. Friends, Ashadhi Ekadashi, which fell on rd July, is celebrated as a day of grand transformation of Pandharpur Wari. Pandharpur is a holy town in Solapur district in Maharashtra. About - days before Ashadhi Ekadashi warkari or pilgrims start the Pandharpur Yatra on foot. This yatra journey is known as Wari and lakhs of warkaris join this. Wooden foot wear or padukas of great saints like Saint Gyaneshwar and Saint Tukaram are placed in a palki and pilgrims begin their pilgrimage chanting “Vitthal-Vitthal”. Pilgrims go to have a darshan of Vitthal who is also known as Vithoba or Pandurang. Lord Vitthal safeguards the interests of the poor, the deprived ones and the ones who are suffering. People from Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Telengana have deep devotion and respect for Vitthal. Visiting Vithoba temple in Pandharpur and its grandeur, beauty and spiritual bliss is a unique experience in itself. I request the listeners of “Mann Ki Baat” to visit Pandharpur Wari at least once, whenever they get a chance. Innumerable saints like Gyaneshwar, Namdev, Eknath, Ram Dass, Tukaram are relevant even today in educating the masses. They are imparting energy to fight against superstition in each and every corner across the country. May they be compositions like Bharud Hkk:M or Abhang vHkax, we get a great message of amity, love and brotherhood. We get the mantra to enable the society to fight against blind-faith through devotion and bhakti. These were the people who, at times restrained and corrected the society, even showed a mirror and ensured that old evil traditions get eradicated from the society and that people inculcated a culture of compassion, equality and righteousness. Our mother India is a land full of gems and treasures and the tradition of these great saints that adorned our land are at the same level as the great men who dedicated and sacrificed their lives for our Mother India. One such great man has been Lok Manya Tilak who has left a very deep impression on the hearts of a large number of Indians. We remember and pay our homage to Tilak ji on his birth anniversary on rd July and his death anniversary on st August. Lokmanya Tilak was full of courage and self-confidence. He had the courage to show a mirror to the British about their wrong doings. The British were so afraid of Lok Manya Tilak that they tried to charge him of sedition thrice in two decades; this is no small thing. I want to narrate an interesting incident to the countrymen which is connected with Lok Manya Tilak and his statue in Ahmedabad. When in October , Lok Manya Tilak ji came to Ahmedabad, more than , people that time gave him a welcome and during that very visit, Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel had a chance to talk to him. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel was greatly impressed by Lok Manya Tilakji. When on August , Lok Manya Tilakji passed away, Patel ji had decided then itself that he would build his statue in Ahmedabad. Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel was elected the Mayor of Ahmedabad municipal corporation and he immediately selected Victoria Garden as a venue for Lok Manya Tilak’s memorial and this was the very Victoria Garden which was named after the British Queen. The British were naturally not happy with this and the collector continually kept denying permission. But Sardar Saheb was also Sardar Saheb after all, he was persistent and had remarked that he might have to give up on his post but Lok Manya Tilakji’s statue would certainly be built there. Finally, the statue got built and Sardar Saheb got it unveiled by none other than Mahatma Gandhi on th February, ; and the most interesting point is that during that inaugural ceremony revered Bapuji said that with the coming of Sardar Patel, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation has not only got a man but it has got the strength on the basis of which, building the statue of Tilakji has become possible. And my dear countrymen, the speciality about this statue is that this is a rare statue of Tilakji in which he is sitting in a chair and in this “Swaraj is our birthright” “Swaraj Hamara Janma Sidhha Adhikar Hai” is inscribed right below Tilakji’s statue. And this all happened during the period of British rule. Tradition of publicly celebrating Ganesh Utsav was also initiated with the efforts of Lok Manya Tilakji. The celebration of Ganesh Utsav publicly had become an effective medium in promoting a spirit of social awakening, integration, amity and equality among the masses besides projecting a sense of dedication and festivity in them. This was the period when there was a need for people to get united in the fight against the British; these festivals, by breaking the barriers of casteism and communalism served the purpose of uniting all. Such events gained more popularity with the passage of time. Thus, it becomes clear that our younger generations still care for the brave heroes of our ancient past, its heritage and history. Today, you can see Ganesh pandals in almost every street of various cities. All families in that street collectively organize these pandals. This is an excellent chance for our youth wherein they can learn qualities of leadership and organization and inculcate these in themselves. My dear countrymen! I had requested last time too and now, while remembering Lokmanya Tilak, I will once again urge all of you to celebrate Ganesh Utsav with great enthusiasm and fervour whole heartedly but insist on keeping these celebrations eco-friendly. Right from Ganesh idol to all decorative material everything ought to be eco friendly and I will appreciate that separate competitions be organized in each city, prizes be awarded for these; and I will like that eco friendly items related to Ganesh Utsav are displayed for wider publicity on My Gov and Narendra Modi App. I will surely send your ideas and efforts to the people. Lokmanya Tilak evoked self- confidence amongst our countrymen and gave the slogan “Swaraj is our birth right and I shall have it.” Today is the time to say that Good Governance is our birth right and we will have it. Every Indian should have access to good governance and positive results of development. It is the factoring in of this outreach that will create a new India. After years of Tilak's birth, on the same day i.e. on July , another son of Mother India was born, who sacrificed his life so that his countrymen could breathe freely in an atomsphere of freedom. I am talking about none other than Chandrasekhar Azad. Where will you find a young man in India who will not be inspired listening to these lines - Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamare dil mein hai Dekhna hai zor kitna baazu-e-qaatil mein hai The desire for martyrdom is now in our hearts Let us see the strength in the arms of my executioner These lines inspired many young people like Ashfaq Ullah Khan, Bhagat Singh, Chandrashekhar Azad and many others. Azad’s courage and passion for freedom inspired the youth of the day. Chandrashekhar Azad put his life on the stake, but he never bowed in front of the foreign rule. It was my privilege and good fortune that I had the opportunity of going to Chandrasekhar Azad’s native village of Alirajpur in Madhya Pradesh. I had the opportunity to pay homage in Chandrashekhar Azad Park in Allahabad, Chandrasekhar Azad Ji was a brave man who did not wish to die by the bullet of foreigners - he wished to fight for independence as a free man and if he had to die, he wished to remain a free man! This is what was so special about him. Once again, I bow and pay tributes to the two great sons of Bharat Mata Lokmanya Tilakji and Chandrasekhar Azad ji. Just a few days ago, in the Junior Under- World Athletics Championship in Finland, India's brave daughter and a farmer daughter Hima Das made history by winning the gold medal in the -meter race event. Ekta Bhyan, another daughter of the country, in response to my letter, has emailed me from Indonesia, where she is now preparing for the Asian Games. Ekta in her e-mail writes - 'The most important moment in the life of any athlete is that when he or she holds the tricolor and I am proud that I could do that.' Ekta, we all are proud of you. You have brought glory to the Nation. Ekta has won the gold and bronze medals in World Para Athletics Grand Prix held in Tunisia. Her achievement is all the more special because she has made the imposing challenges in her life the key to her success. Daughter Ekta Bhyan in , lost the use of half of her lower body due to road accident, but this daughter did not lose courage and made herself all the more stronger to perform this grand feat. Another Divyang, Yogesh Qathuniaji, has won the gold medal in the discus throw in Para Athletics Grand Prix in Berlin and in the process bettered the world record, along with Sundar Singh Gurjar who also won the gold medal in javelin. I salute Ekta Bhyanji, Yogesh Qathuniaji and Sundar Singh Ji, all of you for your fortitude and passion, and congratulate you! May you go further than these successes, keep on playing and keep on blooming. My dear countrymen, the month of August is significant because it is filled with historically important dates and festivals, but due to the weather sometimes sickness also enters the house. I wish all of you best wishes for good health, for this month of August imbued with the spirit of patriotism and for many festivals that have continued over centuries. We will meet once again for Mann Ki Baat' next time. Many Many Thanks. NNamaskar. My dear countrymen, I’m fortunate once again to be face to face with you in the Mann Ki Baat’ programme. Just a few days ago, a historic Cricket match took place in Bengaluru. Of course you must have realized that I am referring to the test match between India and Afghanistan. It was Afghanistan’s first international match and it’s a matter of honour for us that this historic match for Afghanistan was played with India. Both teams performed par excellence. Besides, bowler Rashid Khan had performed exceedingly well in the IPL earlier this year. I remember Afghanistan President Shriman Ashraf Ghani’s words on Twitter tagging me along “The people of Afghanistan are extremely, proud of our hero Rashid Khan. I’m also thankful to our Indian friends who created a platform for our players to showcase their skills”. Rashid represents what constitutes the best of Afghanistan. He is an asset to the world of cricket. Then he quipped “No, we are not giving him to anyone!” This match will remain etched in our memories for a long time. Anyway, being the first match, it is naturally memorable, but I will cherish it for a special reason. The Indian team did something that is exemplary to the whole world. What does a winning team do while receiving the trophy The Indian team, while receiving the trophy, warmly invited the Afghanistan team which had played its first international match to pose together for photographs. This incident exemplifies the very spirit of sportsmanship. Sports is an excellent route to unite society and to showcase the talents skills of our youth. I felicitate both the teams of India Afghanistan. I sincerely hope, that in future too, we’ll play with each other with the best sportsman spirit shine together. My dear countrymen, this st of June, the fourth Yoga Day presented the rarest of sights. The whole world appeared as one entity. In the European Parliament in Brussels, at the UN headquarters in New York, on Japanese naval warships, there were sights of people performing yoga. Saudi Arabia witnessed its first, historic yoga programme and I am told many aasans were demonstrated by women. On the snow capped mountain peaks of Ladakh, Indian and Chinese soldiers performed yoga in unison. Yoga breaks all barriers of borders and unites people. Zealous citizens of hundreds of lands overlooked divisions of caste, religion, region, colour and gender to transform this occasion into a massive festival. If people from the entire world ardently participated in programmes on Yoga Day, why should India not feel elated many times over It is a matter of great pride for a hundred twenty five crore people to witness members of our armed forces perform yoga on land, sea sky. A section of our brave soldiers did yoga in submarines; some of them chose the snow clad mountainous terrain of Siachen for the same. Our air warriors astounded everyone by performing yogasans in mid sky, some thousand feet above the earth. Spectacular was the fact that they achieved this feat not inside an airplane but while floating mid air. Schools, colleges, offices, parks, skyscrapers, playgrounds came alive- as yoga venues. Heartwarming was an instance in Ahmedabad. Around divyang brothers and sisters assembled at one place to do yoga and thus created a world record.Yogahas broken barriers of caste, creed and geography to unite the people of the entire world, which is the very essence of the real sentiment innate to Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam that we have followed in letter and spirit over centuries. Our Rishis, sages and saints have laid emphasis on certain tenets; yoga has proved them in a concrete manner. I believe that the concept of wellness today is bringing about a revolution. I hope the campaign of wellness through yoga will gain further momentum. More and more people will come forward to make it a part of their lives. My dear countrymen, many of you have urged me on My gov and Narendra Modi app to mention Doctor’s Day, the st of July. You are absolutely right. We think of doctors only during times of distress. But this is a day when the nation celebrates the achievements of our doctors and expresses gratitude for their spirit of service and commitment towards society. We are a people who, by nature, revere the Mother as the equivalent of god since she is the source of our very existence, our life. On the other hand, there are times when it is the Doctor who gives us re-birth. The role of a doctor is not limited to mere treatment of ailments. Often a doctor plays the role of a family friend, a lifestyle guide. They not only cure but also heal. Today, doctors possess not just medical expertise; they have a vast experience on the co- relation between general lifestyle trends and their effect on our health. Indian doctors have carved a niche for themselves in the entire world through their capabilities and skills. Our doctors have gained recognition for their expertise in the medical field, hardworking attitude and the ability to solve complex medical problems. Through Mann Ki Baat I extend my warmest felicitations on behalf of the countrymen to all our doctors, ahead of Doctor’s Day on the st of July. My dear countrymen, as a people, we are truly blessed to be born in this land, bhoomi of Bharat, India. India has had a rich historical canvas. Every single month, every single day in fact, is a marker of one historical event or the other. Every place in India is replete with signposts of heritage. Every place has been blessed with a saint, a luminary or a great, famous personality who has contributed through his sagacity. Thank you very much for your phone call. It is correct that I am reaching Maghar on the th. I am sure you know about Kabirwad in Gujarat when I used to work there, I had organized a National session of people belonging to the tradition of saint Kabir. Once again I have been blessed with the opportunity to visit this Samadhi sthal, this shrine. You must be aware that in eastern Uttar Pradesh, there is a place called Maghar. It is here that Sant Kabir Das ji attained Samadhi. Do you know why Kabir Das ji chose to go to Maghar In those days it was believed that death in Maghar was a roadblock in one’s pathway to heaven. On the contrary, breathing one’s last in Kaashi was a guarantee for entry into heaven. Maghar was considered unholy but Sant Kabirdas never subscribed to that view. He toiled relentlessly to quell many such superstitions and evil social customs of his times. That is why he went to Maghar and chose to attain Samadhi there. Sant Kabir Das ji, through his verses Saakhis’ and Dohas’ stressed upon the virtues of social equality, peace and brotherhood. These were his ideals. We can feel the essence of these ideals in his compositions. They are relevant inspiring even in modern times. I quote a doha , , The true saint is the one who recognizes understands the sufferings of others. Those who do not feel the pain of others are insensitive, uncompassionate. Kabir Das ji laid great emphasis on social cohesion. He was a thinker way ahead of his times. In those days, when the whole world was undergoing strife and degradation of moral values, he spread the message of peace harmony. He worked towards uniting the populace, bridging their differences. “, , ” There will be no enmity in the world if the inner being is at peace. Compassion should be the universal way of life. In another doha, Kabir has written. , , Compassion leads to righteousness, Greed leads to sin. Anger is sure to devour you, Forgiveness is a great virtue. He said , Never ask a saint his caste or creed; Ask him about his repository of knowledge. He appealed to the people to rise above divisions of religion caste and make knowledge wisdom the sole basis of recognition. His principles are relevant even after several centuries have gone by.Since we are referring to Sant Kabir Das ji, I am reminded of a doha couplet in which he says, " , " Such is the exalted status accorded to the guru, the teacher. And one such guru is Jagatguru, Guru Nanak Dev. He showed the righteous path of life to millions, inspiring them for centuries. Guru Nanak Dev’s teachings endeavoured to eradicate caste based discrimination prevalent in society. He perceived humankind as one urged everyone to embrace humanity. Guru Nanak Devji said that the service to the poor and the needy is service to God. Wherever he went, he took many initiatives for the welfare of the society. The establishment of a kitchen free of social discrimination where a person of any caste, sect, religion or community could eat or what we know as the langarsystem was initiated solely by Guru Nanak Dev Ji. The th Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak Dev Ji will be celebrated in . I want all of us to join this great festival with enthusiasm and fervour. To celebrate this festival in the entire Indian society and around the world I also urge you to suggest new ideas, new concepts, and innovations on which we can ponder and make preparations and thus we can also celebrate the Prakash parv as Prerna Parv with great pride. My dear countrymen! The history of India's struggle for independence is very long, very vast and is filled with countless sacrifices. There is another chapter of history associated with Punjab. In the year , years of the horrific incident of Jallianwala Bagh will come to a full circle, it was an incident that embarrassed the entire humanity. Who can forget that dark day of April , , when abusing all limits of power, crossing all the boundaries of cruelty; theguiltless, unarmed and innocent people were fired upon. How can we remember the completion of years of this horrific event is something we canall give a thought to, but we must also remember the everlasting message that this incident has imparted that is - violence and cruelty can never solve any problem. It is peace and non-violence, renunciation and martyrdom that are triumphant in the end! My dear countrymen! Mr. Raman Kumar of Rohini, Delhi, has written on 'Narendra Modi Mobile App' that oncoming July happens to be Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee’s birthday and he wants me to talk about Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in this episode of Mann Ki Baat. Thank you very much, Raman ji. It feels great to see your interest in India's history. You know, yesterdayjune , was the death anniversary of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee was associated with many fields, but the areas which were closest to his heart were education, administration and parliamentary affairs, very few people would know that he was the youngest vice-chancellor of the University of Calcutta at merely years of age. Very few people would also be knowing that in , on the invitation of Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore addressed the convocation in Kolkata University in Bangla. This was the first time under British rule that the convocation in Kolkata University had been addressed to in Bangla. From to , Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee was the first Industries minister of India and, in a sense, helaid a strong foundation for India’s industrial development, he had prepared a solid base, it was he who had prepared a stout platform. The first industrial policy of Independent India, which came in , was stamped with his ideas and vision. Dr. Mukherjee's dream was for India to be industrially self-reliant, competent and prosperous in every sphere. He had wanted India to develop heavy industries and also pay full attention to MSME, handloom, textiles and cottage industry. For the proper development of cottage and small industries with finance availability and organizational setup- All India Handicrafts Board, All India Handloom Board and Khadi Village Industries Board were established between and . There was also a special emphasis by Dr. Mukherjee on indigenization of India's defence production, in the establishment of four most successful mega projects- Chittaranjan locomotive works factory, Hindustan aircraft factory, Sindri fertilizer factory and Damodar Valley Corporation and other river valley projects, Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee contributed significantly. He was very passionate about the development of West Bengal. It was the result of his understanding, prudence and activism that a part of Bengal could be saved and it is still a part of India. For Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, the most important thing was the integrity and unity of India - and for this, at the young age of , he also sacrificed his life. Come! Let us forever remember Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee’s message of unity imbued with the spirit of goodwill and brotherhood and remain proactive with all our might for the progress of India. My dear countrymen! During the past few weeks, I had the opportunity to interact with the beneficiaries of different schemes of government through video call. I got an opportunity to know beyond the confines of the files the changes which are being ushered in the lives of people directly from them. People spoke about their determination, their happiness and their achievements. I believe that this was not a mere governmental programme for me, but it was a unique learning experience and during this time the joy of seeing people's faces lit with happiness, can be the moment of greatest satisfaction in anyone's life When I would listen to the stories of a common man, his guileless words narrating his experience would touch my heart. In far-distant villages, daughters are providing services ranging from pension to issuance of passport to senior citizens through the aegis of common service centers. Asister from Chhattisgarh collects custard apple and does business by making its ice cream. Like Anjan Prakash in Jharkhand, many lakhs of young besides running the Yuva Jan Aushidhi kendras in the country are providing affordable medicines in the nearby villages. At the same time a young man from West Bengal desperately seeking a job two to three years ago is now a successful entrepreneur ; And not only this he is providing employment to ten to fifteen people. Whereas young school students from Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Goa are working on an important topic like waste management in their school’s tinkering lab. I just do not know how many such stories were shared with me, there wasn’t a single corner of the country where people did not have a success story of theirs to share with me. I am glad that in this entire programme I witnessed the accomplishments of the common man more than the achievements of the government, of the country's power, the power of New India’s dreams, the power of the resolve of the new India this is what I experienced! There are certain people in society, who find no solace till they do not express their frustrated views, their depressed views and seek ways to divide rather than unite. In such an environment, when the common man comes to you talking about emerging hope, new zeal and events that have taken place in his life, it is not to the government's credit. An incident regarding a small girl from a remote village too can inspire the hundred and twenty five crore people. With the help of technology, through the video bridge even a single moment spentwith the beneficiaries was very enjoyable, very motivational and provided satisfaction to work more. There is a renewed joy in dedicating your life for the upliftment, and you’re left with renewed fervour and inspiration. I am very grateful to the countrymen. - lakh people participated in this video bridge program and imparted me with a new strength. I again want to express my gratitude to you all. My dear countrymen! I always feel that if we look around us, somewhere or something good always happens. Many good people out there are involved in beneficial work. We can also smell the fragrance of righteousness. In the past, one thing came to my attention and it happens to be a very unique combination. On one hand, where we have professionals and engineers, on the other hand, there exist farmers tilling the fields, our brethren-sisters associated with agriculture. Now you must be wondering that these are two completely different occupations - what is the relation between these professions But there exists a link, in Bangalore, corporate professionals and IT engineers came along and created an effortless Samridhi trust’ with which they have doubled the income of the farmers by successful activation of this trust. This trust remained associated with farmers, drew plans and made successful efforts to increase the income of farmers. The training to inculcate organic farming while teaching latest agricultural techniques and how to grow more crops along with a single cash crop in the fields was imparted through the professional, engineers and technocrats associated with this trust started giving training to the farmers. The farmers who initially used to depend on the same single cash crop in their fields and that too the yield was also not good begetting lesser profits, today are not only growing vegetables but also marketing their own vegetables and getting good prices through the trust. Farmers producing grains have also become associated with this trust. On one hand, farmers have a major role in the entire chain from cultivation till the marketing of crops, whereas on the other hand, to make certain the farmers' participation in reaping profits is an attempt to guarantee their right. A separate seed bank has been created to make good agricultural strains available for reaping a bumper harvest. Women have also been added in this activity and they supervise the work of this seed-bank. I congratulate these young people for this innovative experiment and I am happy that these young professionals, technocrats and others associated with the world of engineering, got out of their comfort zone to make a connect with the farmer, the village, fields and barns. Friends! Your youth-power is really inspiring for any young person. Many other young people of our country will definitely visit your website and look closely at your work and will also be inspired by how they can be of use in different areas of the social milieu in their area. I once again felicitate the youth of my country for their innovative experiments, some of which I might have got to know, some might have escaped me, some people might or may not be aware of but nonetheless I wish countless people involved in doing beneficial work ,very good luck from my side. My dear countrymen! It’s been an year when GST was implemented. 'One Nation, One Tax' was the dream of the people of this country that has become a reality today. If I’ve to give credit to anyone for successful implementation of One Nation One Tax reform’, then I credit the states of our nation. GST is a great example of Cooperative federalism, where all the states decided to take a unanimous decision in the interest of the nation, and then such a huge tax reform could be implemented in the country. So far, there have been meetings of the GST Council and we can all feel proud that people from different political ideologies have been involved in these meetings. These meetings involve representatives of different states; states which have different priorities, but in spite of all this, all the decisions that have been taken in the GST Council so far have been taken with absolute consensus. Before the onset of GST scheme, there were different types of taxes prevailing in the country, but now only one tax is applicable in the entire country. GST is not only the victory of integrity but it is also a celebration of honesty. Earlier, in the case of taxation and allied affairs in the country, there were rampant complaints of Inspector Raj. In the GST scheme,information technology has replaced the inspector. Everything from return to refund is done through online information technology. The check post has become extinct after the arrival of the GST scheme and the movement of goods has become faster, which not only saves time but is also accruing benefits in the areaof logistics. GST is probably be the biggest tax reform in the world. The successful implementation of such a huge tax reform in India was successful only because the people of the country adopted it and through the power of the masses, fuelled the success of the GST scheme. It is generally believed that such a big tax reform, in a huge country like ours with such a large population takes to years for effective adoption. However within a year, the enthusiasm of the honest people of this nation, the celebration of integrity in the country and the participation of people resulted in this new tax system managing to create a space for itself, has achieved stability and according to the need, it will bring reform through its inbuilt arrangement. This is a huge success in itself which crore Indians have earned for themselves. My dear countrymen! Once again, while concluding this episode, I wait most eagerly for the next chapter of Mann Ki Baat’, of meeting you and talking to you. I wish you many felicitations. Thank you very much. Namaskar. Through Mann Ki Baat’, I once again have been blessed with the opportunity to be face-to-face with you. I am sure you distinctly remember that for the last many months, a naval team comprising six women Commanders was on a voyage. I want to tell you something about the Naavika Saagar Parikrama’. These six illustrious daughters of India circumnavigated the globe for over more than days on board the INSV Tarini, returning home on the st of May. The entire country welcomed them with open arms, with high spirits. They traversed a multitude of oceans, many a sea, over a distance of almost twenty two thousand nautical miles. This was a first of its kind event in the entire world. Last Wednesday, I got an opportunity to meet these daughters and listen to their experiences. Once again, I congratulate these daughters and their spirit of adventure for bringing laurels to the country, for raising the glory of the Navy and significantly so, for conveying to the world that India’s daughters are no less. Who does not know of the sense of adventure If you view the journey of human evolution, you will notice that breakthroughs in progress have taken birth in the womb of some adventure or the other. There is an umbilical link between development and adventure; the resolve to achieve something, the burning desire to do something unparalleled, the sentiment proclaiming “I too can do it”. The number of such people may be miniscule, but they turn out to be sources of inspiration for millions of others, spanning an array of eras. Recently, you must have come across quite a few notable happenings pertaining to mountaineers attempting to scale Mount Everest. For centuries, Everest has been throwing the gauntlet at humankind. And for long, brave hearts have been responding to the challenge. On the th of May, a team comprising five tribal students of an Ashram School in Chandrapur, Maharashtra- Maneesha Dhurve, Pramesh Ale, Umakant Madhavi, Kavidas Katmode and Vikas Soyam- scaled the world’s highest peak. These Ashram School students began training in August, , covering Wardha, Hyderabad, Darjeeling and Leh-Ladakh. These young boys girls had been selected under Mission Shaurya’. True to its name, they brought glory to the country with their brave deed of conquering the Everest. I congratulate these young friends and members of the school in Chandrapur, from the core of my heart. Just a while ago, year old Shivangi Pathak became the youngest Indian woman to scale Everest from the Nepal side. Heartiest congratulations, Beti Shivangi. Ajit Bajaj and his daughter became the first ever father-daughter duo to ascend Everest. And it’s not that only the young are climbing Everest. On the th of May, Sangeeta Bahal, aged more than , scaled the Everest. There are some mountaineers who have shown that apart from possessing skills, they are sensitive too. A few days ago, under the Clean Ganga Campaign’, a group from the BSF Scaled the Everest and while returning, removed loads of trash littered there and brought it down. This deed is commendable indeed; it also displays their commitment towards cleanliness and the environment. People have been ascending the Everest for years many have managed to reach the peak successfully. I congratulate these daredevils, especially the daughters from the core of my heart. My dear countrymen, especially my young friends, just a couple of months ago, when I mentioned Fit India’, I did not think it would draw such a good response; that a large number of people would come forward to support it. When I say Fit India’, I believe that the more we play, the more we will inspire the country to come out play. People are sharing videos of Fitness Challenge on social media; they are tagging each other to spread the challenge. Everybody is now getting connected with this Fit India Campaign. People from the film fraternity, from the world of Sports, common citizens of the country, members of the armed forces, school teachers or even those toiling in fields and farms, their rising notes are building up a crescendo Hum Fit toh India Fit’ If we are fit, India is fit’. For me, it’s heartwarming that the captain of the Indian Cricket team Virat Kohli ji has included me in his challenge and I too have accepted his challenge. I believe this is gainful and this kind of a challenge will inspire us to be fit along with others, as well. My dear countrymen, many a time in Mann Ki Baat’, you must have heard me mention a thing or two about sports sportspersons. And in the last episode, our heroes of the Commonwealth Games shared with us their Mann Ki Baat’, matters close to their hearts through this programme. Chhavi Yadav ji, thank you very much for your phone call. It is true that sports games that were once a part parcel of every child’s life, in every lane in the neighbourhood, are fading into oblivion. These games used to be a special feature of summer holidays. Sometimes in scorching afternoons; at times after dinner, children used to play with exuberant abandon for hours together, leaving all worries behind. Some games saw the participation of the whole family. Aiming the ball at the crooked column of stone slats- Pitthoo, playing marbles, testing one’s agility in Kho kho, spinning the top, Lattoo, or applying skills in swiftly flicking the tapered- edged wooden peg and hitting it aloft-Gilli-Danda, innumerable games were an inseparable part of each every child’s life from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to Kamrup. Of course, those games were known by different names, depending on the place. Pitthoo is one such game. Some called it Lagori, at other places it was Satoriya, Saat Pathar, Dikori, Satodiya one game with many names! Traditional sports and games comprise both varieties outdoor and indoor as well. The unity, intrinsic to our country’s diversity can be witnessed in these games. A single game is known by distinct names at different places. I am from Gujarat. I known of a game played in Gujarat called Chomal Isto. It is played with cowries or tamarind seeds or dice on an eight by eight square board. It used to be played in almost every state. Known as Chowkabara in Karnataka, Attoo in Madhya Pradesh, Pakidakaali in Kerala, Champal in Maharashtra, Daayaam and Thaayaam in Tamilnadu, Changaa Po in Rajasthan, it had innumerable names. One realizes after playing, despite not knowing the language of a particular state, “Oh! We used to play this game in our state as well!” Who amongst us would not have enjoyed playing Gilli-Danda in our childhood This is a game that is played across villages and cities. It is also known by different names. In Andhra Pradesh it is called Gotibilla or Karrabilla. In Odisha it’s called Gulibadi and in Maharashtra, Vittidaaloo. Some games are seasonal. There is a season for flying kites. While flying a kite or playing a game, one freely expresses one’s inherent unique qualities. You must have seen many a child, shy by nature, leap up with zest, the moment a game begins. Even children with a seemingly serious countenance start expressing themselves; while playing, the innate child within them comes to the fore. Traditional sports and games are structured in such a manner that along with physical ability, they enhance our logical thinking, concentration, alertness and energy levels. Games are not just games; they teach us values in life, such as, setting targets, building up determination, developing team spirit and fostering mutual co-operation. I recently noticed in a training programme in Business Management, our traditional sports and games being used for improving overall personality development and interpersonal skills. These games are proving to be handy in overall development. And then, there is no prescribed age limit for participating in them. From tiny tots to Grandfather-Grandmother, when we all play these games together then the term Generation Gap’ disappears on its own. At the same time, we also come to know about our culture and traditions. Many games also make us aware about our society, environment and other spheres. It is a matter of concern, whether these sports games will fade away to the point of extinction. It will not just be a loss of a game; it will be the loss of the spirit of childhood, something that will exist only in the verses of poetry. Ye daulat bhi le lo Ye shohrat bhi le lo Bhale chheen lo mujhse meri jawani Magar mujhko lauta do bachpan ka sawan Wo kagaz ki kashti, wo baarish ka paani Take away all my riches Bereave me of all this fame Snuff out my youth if you so wish But do return the monsoon that drenched me as a child The puddles my paper boats, the magic of my rains. And we will be forever reduced to listening to this song, hence we must keep our traditional sports alive. It is crucial that today schools, neighbourhoods and youth congregations should come forward and promote these games. Through crowd sourcing we can create a very large archive of our traditional games. The Videos of these games can be shot, outlining the way to play these games along with the mandatory rules and regulations. Animation films can also be made so that our young generations for whom these games played in our streets are something to marvel about, can see, play for themselves and thus bloom. My dear countrymen, on the th of June, our nation, India will officially host the World Environment Day Celebrations. This is a very important achievement for India and it is also an acknowledgement as well as recognition of India's growing leadership in the direction of tackling climate change. This time the theme is 'Beat Plastic Pollution'. I appeal to all of you, that while trying to understand the importance of this theme, we should all ensure that we do not use low grade polythene and low grade plastics and try to curb the negative impact of plastic pollution on our environment, on our wild life and our health. Let us all visit the World Environment Day website wed-india ’ and try to imbibe and inculcate the many interesting suggestions given there into our everyday life. Whenever we face a torrid summer, or floods, incessant rains or unbearable cold, everybody becomes an expert, analyzing global warming and climate change. But does empty talk bring about any solutions Being sensitive towards nature, protecting nature, should come naturally to us; these virtues should be embedded in our sanskar. In the past few weeks, we all witnessed that there were dust storms in the different regions of the country, along with heavy winds and unseasonal heavy rains. There was also loss of life and property. These calamities are basically the result of the change in weather patterns. Our culture, our traditions have never taught us to be at loggerheads with nature. We have to live in harmony and in synchronicity with nature, we have to stay in touch with nature. Mahatma Gandhi had advocated this wisdom at every step of his life. Today when India speaks of climate justice or plays a major role in the Cop and Paris agreements or when we unite the whole world through the medium of International Solar Alliance, they all are rooted in fulfilling that very dream of Mahatma Gandhi. On this environment day, let all of us give it a good thought as to what can we do to make our planet cleaner and greener How can we progress in this direction What innovative things can we do The rainy season is fast approaching; we can set a target of achieving record plantation of trees this time and not only plant trees but also nurture and maintain the saplings till they grow. My dear countrymen and especially my young friends, you do remember the st of June now; not only you and I, June st remains a part of the entire world’s collective consciousness. The st of June has been mandated and is celebrated as the International Yoga Day in the entire world and people start preparing for it months in advance. The news being received these days is that there are preparations afoot in the whole world to celebrate st June as International Yoga Day. Yoga for unity and a harmonious society conveys a message that has permeated the world over. Centuries ago, the great Sanskrit Poet Bhartahari had written in his Shataktrayam’. S A man whose father is patience, mother is forgiveness and peace as consort, Truth as his friend, compassion as his sister and restraint for brother as family members and whose bed is the great earth, is clothed by the great sky and whose food is only knowledge. Is indeed a Yogi who won't know any fear. This observation expressed centuries ago, straightaway implies that practicing yogic exercises on a regular basis leads to imbibing benefic attributes which stand by our side like relatives and friends. The practice of yoga leads to building up of courage, which always protects us like a father. The practice of yoga leads to germination of a sense of forgiveness in the same manner as a mother has for her children and mental peace becomes our permanent friend. Bhartahari has said that with regular yogic exercise, truth becomes our child, mercy becomes our sister, self restraint our brother, earth turns in to our bed and knowledge satiates our hunger. When so many attributes become one's partner, then that yogi conquers all forms of fear. Once again, I appeal to all the citizens to adopt their legacy of yoga and create a healthy, happy and harmonious nation. My dear countrymen, today is the th of May, the death anniversary of the first Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru ji. I render my pranam to Pandit ji. Memories of this month are also linked with Veer Savarkar. This was the very month, the month of May , when Indians had displayed their strength against the British. In many parts of the country, our youth and farmers demonstrated their bravery whilst standing up against the injustice. It is indeed sad that we kept on calling the events of only as a rebellion or a soldiers’ mutiny for a very long time. In fact, May was not only evaluated as a minor historical incident but was also an attempt to dent our self-respect. It was Veer Savarkar who boldly expostulated by writing that whatever happened in was not a revolt but was indeed the First War of Independence. Savarkar along with his band of brave hearts celebrated the th anniversary of the First War of Independence with great fanfare at India house in London. It is also an amazing coincidence that the month which witnessed the First Struggle for Independence was the month in which Veer Savarkar ji was born. Savarkar ji’s personality was full of special qualities; he was a worshipper of both weapons or shashtra and Knowledge or shaashtras. Generally Veer Savarkar is renowned for his bravery and his struggle against the British Raj. But besides these sterling qualities, he was also a striking poet and a social reformer who always emphasized on goodwill and unity. A wonderful account about Savarkarji has been given by our dear honorable Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ji. Atal ji had said - Savarkar means brilliance, Savarkar means sacrifice, Savarkar means penance, Savarkar means substance, Savarkar means logic, Savarkar means youth, Savarkar means an arrow, and Savarkar means a Sword! Behold! What an accurate depiction of Savarkar by Atal ji! Savarkar marched along with both poetry and revolution. Besides being a sensitive poet, he was also a courageous revolutionary. My dear brothers and sisters, I was watching a story on TV about our underprivileged daughters of certain slums in Sikar, Rajasthan. Our daughters, who were forced to sift through garbage and beg from home to home in order to earn a living - today they are learning sewing and stitching clothes to cover the impoverished. This is an example where the daughters are stitching ordinary to good quality clothes for themselves and other families. Along with this, they are undergoing a training course in skill development. These daughters have become self-reliant today and are living their lives with respect and have become a strong support to their families. I wish all these daughters, brimming with hope and trust, a very bright future. They have demonstrated that if you have the desire to do something and if you are determined towards that goal then success can be achieved despite all odds! And this is not only about Sikar, but in every corner of India, you will witness something akin to this. If you observe in your neighbourhood, then you will witness for yourselves how people overcome the difficulties in their lives! You must have realized that whenever we go to a tea shop, and enjoy tea there, a discussion with some of the customers automatically ensues. These discussions are also political and social in nature, can be about movies, sports and sportspersons or can focus even on the problems of the country any problem with probable solutions are discussed at length but often the problems and their solutions remain limited to such animated discussions only. But there are some people who go ahead with their work, to bring about a change through their hard work and dedication; they make it a reality. Such is the story of D. Prakash Rao, living in the slums of Cuttack, Orissa, who gave up everything of his in order to adopt and realize the dreams of others! Just yesterday I’ve had the good fortune of meeting D. Prakash Rao. Shriman D. Prakash Rao has been a tea vendor in the city of Cuttack for the past five decades. A meagre tea vendor; today you will be surprised to know that the lives of more than children are being illuminated through education due to his efforts. He has opened a school named 'Asha Ashvaasan', spending of his income for children living in slums and hutments. He ensures education, health and meals for all the children coming to this school. I congratulate D. Prakash Rao for his hard work, his persistence and for providing a new direction to the lives of those poor children attending his school. He has banished the darkness from their lives. Who amongst us does not know the Vedic shloka 'Tamso Ma Jyotirgamaya'! However, it has been put into practice by D. Prakash Rao. His life is an inspiration to us, our society and the whole country. Your surroundings too must be full of such inspiring happenings. There must be innumerable incidents. Come, let us take positivity forward. The month of June is so hot that people anxiously wait for the rains, gazing towards the sky for the clouds to appear. People will wait for the moon in a few days from now onwards. Witnessing the moon means that the festival of Eid can be celebrated. After an entire month of fasting during Ramzan, the festival of Eid is a harbinger of celebrations. I hope and believe that everyone will celebrate Eid with gaiety and fervor and on this occasion children will specially get a grand Eidi’. I hope that the festival of Eid will further strengthen the bonds of harmony in our society. Heartiest felicitations to all of you. My dear countrymen, many thanks to you all. We shall meet once again in another episode of Mann Ki Baat’ next month. Namaskar 